# The Fundamental Group

One of the basic problems of topology is to determine whether two given topological spaces are homeomorphic or not. There is no method for solving this problem in general, but techniques do exist that apply in particular cases.

Showing that two spaces are homeomorphic is a matter of constructing a continuous mapping from one to the other having a continuous inverse,and constructing continuous functions is a problem that we have developed techniques to handle.

Showing that two spaces are not homeomorphic is a different matter. For that, one must show that a continuous function with continuous inverse does not exist. If one can find some topological property that holds for one space but not for the other, then the problem is solved—the spaces cannot be homeomorphic. The closed interval [0,1] cannot be homeomorphic to the open interval (O,I),for instance,because the first space is compact and the second one is not. And the real line R cannot be homeomorphic to the“long line"L,because R has a countable basis and L does not. Nor can the real line R be homeomorphic to the plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ；deletnga point from $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ leaves a connected space remaining,and deleting a point from R does not.

But the topological properties we have studied up to now do not carry us very far in solving the problem．For instance,how does one show that the plane $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is not homeomorphic to three-dimensional space $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 } \mathbf { \cdot }$ $\mathbf { A } \mathbf { s }$ one goes down the list of topological properties-compactness, connectedness,local connectedness,metrizability,and so on-one can find no topological property that distinguishes between them. As another example,consider such surfaces as the 2-sphere ${ \bf { \bar { \sigma } } } _ { S ^ { 2 } }$ ，the torus T (surface of a doughnut),and the double torus T#T (surface of a two-holed doughnut). None of the topological properties we have studied up to now will distinguish between them.

So we must introduce new properties and new techniques. One of the most natural such properties is that of simple connectedness. You probably have studied this notion already, when you studied line integrals in the plane. Roughly speaking,one says that a space X is simply connected if every closed curve in X can be shrunk to a point in X.(We shall make this more precise later.） The property of simple connectedness, it turns out,will distinguish between $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$ ,deleung a point from $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ leaves a simply connected space remaining,but deleting a point from $\bar { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 }$ does not. It will also distinguish between $s ^ { 2 }$ (which is simply connected) and the torus T (which is not). But it will not distinguish between Tand T#T; neither of them is simply connected.

There is an idea more general than the idea of simple connectedness,an idea that includes simple connectedness as a special case.It involves a certain group that is called the fundamental group of the space. Two spaces that are homeomorphic have fundamental groups that are isomorphic.And the condition of simple connectedness is just the condition that the fundamental group of X is the trivial (one-element) group. Thus,the proof that $s ^ { 2 }$ and T are not homeomorphic can be rephrased by saying that the fundamental group of $s ^ { 2 }$ is trivial and the fundamental group of T is not. The fundamental group will distinguish between more spaces than the condition of simple connectedness will. It can be used,for example,to show that T and T#T are not homeomorphic; it turns out that T has an abelian fundamental group and T#T does not.

In this chapter, we define the fundamental group and study its properties. Then we apply it to a number of problems,including the problem of showing that various spaces,such as those already mentioned,are not homeomorphic.

Other applicatons include theorems about fixed points and antipode-preserving maps of the sphere,as well as the well-known fundamental theorem of algebra,which says that every polynomial equation with real or complex coefficients has a root. Finally,there is the famous Jordan curve theorem,which we shall study in the next chapter; it states that every simple closed curve C in the plane separates the plane into two components,of which C is the common boundary.

Throughout,we assume familiarity with the quotient topology（&22） and local connectedness (\$25).

## \$51 Homotopy of Paths

Before defining the fundamental group of a space X,we shall consider paths on X and an equivalence relation called path homotopy between them. And we shall define a certain operation on the collection of the equivalence classes that makes it into what is called in algebra a groupoid.

Definition. If f and $f ^ { \prime }$ are continuous maps of the space X into the space $\boldsymbol { \gamma } _ { , }$ we say that f is homotopic to $f ^ { \prime }$ if there is a continuous map $\pmb { F } \cdot \pmb { X } \times \pmb { I }  \pmb { Y }$ such that

$$
F ( x , 0 ) = f ( x ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad F ( x , 1 ) = f ^ { \prime } ( x )
$$

for each x. (Here $I = [ 0 , 1 ] . )$ The map $\pmb { F }$ is called a homotopy between $f$ and $f ^ { \prime }$ If $f$ is homotopic to $\pmb { f ^ { \prime } }$ ,we write $f \simeq f ^ { \prime }$ . 1f $f \simeq f ^ { \prime }$ and $f ^ { \prime }$ is a constant map, we say that f is nulhomotopic.

We think of a homotopy as a continuous one-parameter family of maps from X to YIf we imagine the parameter t as representing time,then the homotopy $\pmb { F }$ represents a continuous “deforming”of the map f to the map $f ^ { \prime }$ ,as t goes from $_ 0$ to 1.

Now we consider the special case in which f is a path in X.Recall that if $f$ ： $[ 0 , 1 ] \to X$ is a continuous map such that $f ( 0 ) = x _ { 0 }$ and $f ( 1 ) = x _ { \mathrm { l } }$ ,we say that $f$ is a path in X from $x _ { 0 } t o x _ { 1 }$ . We also say that xo is the initial point,and $\pmb { x } _ { 1 }$ the final point, of the path $f$ 、In this chapter,we shall for convenience use the interval $I = [ 0 , 1 ]$ as the domain for all paths.

If f and $f ^ { \prime }$ are two paths in X,there is a stronger relation between them than mere homotopy. It is defined as follows:

Definition. Two paths $f$ and $\pmb { f ^ { \prime } }$ ,mapping the interval $I = [ 0 , 1 ]$ into X, are said to be path homotopic if they have the same initial point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ and the same final point $x _ { 1 }$ and if there is acontinuous map $F : I \times I \to X$ such that

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { F ( s , 0 ) = f ( s ) \ } & { \mathrm { a n d } \quad F ( s , 1 ) = f ^ { \prime } ( s ) , } \\ { F ( 0 , t ) = x _ { 0 } \quad } & { \mathrm { a n d } \quad F ( 1 , t ) = x _ { 1 } , } \end{array}
$$

for each $s \in I$ and each $t \in { I }$ We call F a path homotopy between $f$ and $\pmb { f ^ { \prime } }$ See Figure 51.1. If f is path homotopic to $f ^ { \prime }$ we wnte $f \simeq _ { p } f ^ { \prime }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.1

The first condition says simply that F is a homotopy between f and $f ^ { \prime }$ ,and the second says that for eacht,the path $f _ { t }$ defined by the equation $f _ { t } ( s ) = F ( s , t )$ is a path from $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ to $x _ { 1 }$ ． Said differently,the first condition says that $\pmb { F }$ represents a continuous way of deforming the path $f$ to the path $f ^ { \prime }$ ,and the second condition says that the end points of the path remain fixed during the deformation.

Lemma 51.1. The relatons \~ and \~p are equivalence relations.

If f is apath,we shall denote its path-homotopy equivalence class by $[ f ]$

Proof.Let us verify the properues of an equivalence relation.

Givenf,it is trvial that $f \simeq f ;$ the map $\boldsymbol { F } ( \boldsymbol { x } , t ) = \boldsymbol { f } ( \boldsymbol { x } )$ is the required homotopy. $\ Ḋ \mathrm { Ḋ } f Ḍ Ḍ$ is a path,Fisapath homotopy.

Given $f \simeq f ^ { \prime }$ ,we show that $f ^ { \prime } \simeq f$ .Let F be a homotopy between $f$ and $f ^ { \prime }$ Then $\boldsymbol { G } ( \boldsymbol { x } , t ) = \boldsymbol { F } ( \boldsymbol { x } , 1 - t )$ is a homotopy between $f ^ { \prime }$ and f. If Fis a path homotopy, so is G.

Suppose that $f \simeq f ^ { \prime }$ and $f ^ { \prime } \simeq f ^ { \prime \prime }$ We show that $f \simeq f ^ { \prime \prime }$ Let F be a homotopy between $f$ and $f ^ { \prime }$ ,and let $F ^ { \prime }$ be a homotopy between $f ^ { \prime }$ and $f ^ { \prime \prime }$ . Define $G : X \times I \to$ Y by the equation

$$
\begin{array} { r } { G ( x , t ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { F ( x , 2 t ) } & { \mathrm { f o r } t \in [ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ] , } \\ { F ^ { \prime } ( x , 2 t - 1 ) } & { \mathrm { f o r } t \in [ \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 1 ] . } \end{array} \right. } \end{array}
$$

The map G is well defined, since if $\begin{array} { r } { t = \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \end{array}$ ,we have $F ( x , 2 t ) = f ^ { \prime } ( x ) = F ^ { \prime } ( x , 2 t - 1 )$ Because G is continuous on the two closed subsets ${ X \times [ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ] }$ and ${ \pmb X } \times [ \mathinner { \frac { 1 } { 2 } \mathopen { , } \mathclose \bgroup \left. \right]} $ of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { I }$ it is continuous on all of $X \times I$ ,by the pasting lemma. Thus G is the required homotopy between $f$ and $\pmb { f ^ { \prime \prime } }$

You can check that if F and $F ^ { \prime }$ are path homotopies,so is G. See Figure 51.2. ■

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.2  
EXAMPLE l.Let f and g be any two maps of a space X into $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ It is easy to see that f and g are homotopic; the map

$$
F ( x , t ) = ( 1 - t ) f ( x ) + t g ( x )
$$

is a homotopy between them. It is called a straight-line homotopy because it moves the point $f ( x )$ to the point ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb x } )$ along the straight-line segment joining them.

If f and g are paths from xo to xi,then F willbe a path homotopy,as you can check. This situation is pictured in Figure 51.3.

More generally, Iet A be any convex subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ .(This means that for any two points a,b of A,the straight line segment joining a and b is contained in A.) Then any two paths $f , g$ in A from $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ 0 $\pmb { x } _ { 1 }$ are path homotopic in A,for thestraight-line homotopy $\pmb { F }$ between them has image set in A

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.3

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.4  
EXAMPLE 2Let X denote the punctured plane, $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \{ \boldsymbol { \mathbf { 0 } } \}$ ,which we shall denote by $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \bullet$ for short The following paths in $\pmb { \chi }$

$$
\begin{array} { l } { f ( s ) = ( \cos \pi s , \sin \pi s ) , } \\ { g ( s ) = ( \cos \pi s , 2 \sin \pi s ) } \end{array}
$$

are path homotopic,the straight-line homotopy between them is an acceptable path homotopy But the straight-line homotopy between fand the path

$$
h ( s ) = ( \cos \pi s , - \sin \pi s )
$$

is not acceptable,for its image does not lie in the space $\pmb { X } = \pmb { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 } .$ See Figure 51.4.

Indeed,there exists no path homotopy in X between paths f and h This result is hardly surprising, it is intuitively clear that one cannot “deform f past the hole at $\pmb { 0 } ^ { \star }$ without introducing a discontinuity. But it takes some work to prove.We shall return to this example later

This example illustrates the fact that you must know what the range space is before you can tell whether two paths are path homotopic or not The paths f and h would be path homotopic if they were paths in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

Now we introduce some algebra into this geometric situation. We define a certain operation on path-homotopy classes as follows:

Definition.If f is a path in X from xo to $x _ { 1 }$ ,and if g isa path in X from $x _ { 1 }$ to $x _ { 2 }$ we define the product $f * g$ of f and g to be the path h given by the equations

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { h } ( s ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { f ( 2 s ) } & { \mathrm { f o r } s \in [ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ] , } \\ { g ( 2 s - 1 ) } & { \mathrm { f o r } s \in [ \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 1 ] . } \end{array} \right. } \end{array}
$$

The function h is well-defined and continuous,by the pasting lemma; it is a path in X from $x _ { 0 }$ 0 $\pmb { x } _ { 2 }$ We think of h as the path whose first half is the path fand whose second half is the path g.

The product operation on paths induces a well-defined operation on path-homotopy classes,defined by the equation

$$
[ f ] \ast [ g ] = [ f \ast g ]
$$

To verify this fact,let F be a path homotopy between f and $f ^ { \prime }$ and let $\pmb { G }$ be a path homotopy between g and $\pmb { g } ^ { \prime }$ Define

$$
H ( s , t ) = \left\{ { \begin{array} { l l } { F ( 2 s , t ) } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } s \in [ 0 , { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } ] , } \\ { G ( 2 s - 1 , t ) } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } s \in [ { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } , 1 ] . } \end{array} } \right.
$$

Because $F ( 1 , t ) = x _ { 1 } = G ( 0 , t )$ for allt,the map H is well-defined; it is continuous by the pasting lemma. You can check that H is the required path homotopy between $f * g$ and $f ^ { \prime } \ast g ^ { \prime }$ It is pictured in Figure 51.5.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.5

The operation \* on path-homotopy classes turns out to satisfy properties that look very much like the axioms for a group. They are called the groupoid properties of \*. One difference from the properties of a group is that $[ f ] * [ g ]$ is not defined for every pair of classes,but only for those pairs $[ f ] , [ g ]$ for which $f ( 1 ) = g ( 0 )$

## Theorem 51.2. The operation \* has the following properties:

(1） (Associativity) $I f [ f ] \ast ( [ g ] \ast [ h ] )$ is defined, so is $( [ f ] * [ g ] ) * [ h ]$ , and they are equal.

(2) (Right and left identities) Given ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$ ,let $\pmb { e } _ { x }$ denote the constant path $e _ { x } \cdot I \to$ X carrying allofI to the point x.If f is a path in X from xo $_ { t 0 x _ { 1 } }$ , then

$$
[ f ] * [ e _ { x _ { 1 } } ] = [ f ] \quad \ a n d \quad \ [ e _ { x _ { 0 } } ] * [ f ] = [ f ] .
$$

(3) (Inverse) Given the path f in X from xo to $x _ { 1 }$ let $\bar { f }$ be the path defined by ${ \bar { f } } ( s ) = f ( 1 - s )$ . It is called the reverse of f Then

$$
[ f ] * [ { \bar { f } } ] = [ e _ { x _ { 0 } } ] { \mathrm { a } n } d [ { \bar { f } } ] * [ f ] = [ e _ { x _ { 1 } } ] .
$$

Proof.We shall make use of two elementary facts.The first is the fact that if k : $X  Y$ is a continuous map,and if F is a path homotopy in X between the paths f and $f ^ { \prime }$ ,then $k \circ F$ is a path homotopy in Y between the paths k of and $k \circ f ^ { \prime }$ . See Figure 51.6.

<!-- image-->

The second is the fact that if $k : X \to Y$ is a continuous map and if f and g are paths in X with $f ( 1 ) = g ( 0 )$ ,then

$$
k \circ ( f * g ) = ( k \circ f ) * ( k \circ g ) .
$$

This equation follows at once from the definition of the product operation \*.

Step I.We verify properties (2) and (3). To verify (2), we let $\pmb { e 0 }$ denote the constant path in /at O,and we let i: $I  I$ denote the identity map,which is a path in / from 0 to 1. Then $e _ { 0 } * i$ is also a path in/ from O to 1.(The graphs of these two paths are pictured in Figure 51.7.)

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.7

Because I is convex,there is a path homotopy G in / between i and $e _ { 0 } * i$ . Then $f \circ G$ is a path homotopy in X between the paths $f \circ i = f$ and

$$
f \circ ( e _ { 0 } * i ) = ( f \circ e _ { 0 } ) * ( f \circ i ) = e _ { x _ { 0 } } * f .
$$

An entirely similar argument, using the fact that if $e _ { 1 }$ denotes the constant path at 1, then $i * e _ { 1 }$ is path homotopic in/ to the path i,shows that $[ f ] \ast [ e _ { x _ { 1 } } ] = [ f ]$

To verify (3), note that the reverse of i is $\bar { \iota } ( s ) = 1 - s$ Then $i * \tilde { \iota }$ is a path in I beginning and ending at O,and so is the constant path ${ \pmb e } _ { 0 }$ (Their graphs are pictured in Figure 51.8.）Because / is convex,there is a path homotopy H in / between ${ \pmb e } _ { 0 }$ and $i * \bar { \iota }$ Then $f \circ H$ is a path homotopy between $f \circ e _ { 0 } = e _ { x _ { 0 } }$ and

$$
( f \circ i ) * ( f \circ \bar { \iota } ) = f * \bar { f } .
$$

An entirely simlar argument,using the fact that $\overline { { \iota } } \ast \dot { \iota }$ is path homotopic in / to $e _ { 1 }$ shows that $[ \bar { f } ] \ast [ f ] = [ e _ { x _ { 1 } } ]$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 51.8

Step 2.The proof of(1),associativity,is a bit trickier.For this proof,and for later use as well, it will be convenient to describe the product $f * g$ in a different way.

If [a,b] and [c,d] are two intervals in R,there is a unique map $p : [ a , b ]  [ c , d ]$ of the form $p ( x ) = m x + k$ that carries a to c and b to $d ;$ we call it thepositive linear map of $[ a , b ]$ to $[ c , d ]$ because its graph is a straight line with positive slope.Note that the inverse of such a map is another such map,and so is the composite of two such maps.

With thus terminology,the product $f * g$ can be described as follows: On $[ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ]$ it equals the positive linear map of $[ 0 , \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } ]$ to [0,1], followed by $f ;$ and on $[ \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 1 ]$ , it equals the positive linear map of $[ \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } , 1 ]$ to [0, 1], followed by $\pmb { \xi }$

Now we verify (l).Given paths $f , g$ 、and h in X,the products $f * ( g * h )$ and $( f * g ) * h$ are defined precisely when $f ( 1 ) = g ( 0 )$ and $g ( 1 ) = h ( 0 )$ .Assuming these two conditions,we define also a “trple product"of the paths $f , g ,$ and h as follows: Choosepoints aandb of I so that $0 < a < b < 1$ . Define a path $k _ { a , b }$ in X as follows:

On [0,a] it equals the positive linear map of $[ 0 , a ]$ to I followed by f: on $[ a , b ]$ it equals the positive linear map of $[ a , b ]$ to I followed by g; and on $\left[ b , 1 \right]$ it equals the positive linear map of [b,1] to / followed by h. The path $k _ { a , b }$ depends of course on the choice of the points a and b.But its path-homotopy class does not! We show that if c and d are another pair of points of I with $0 < c < d < 1$ ,then $k _ { c , d }$ is path homotopic to $k _ { a , b }$

Let $p : I  I$ be the map whose graph is pictured in Figure 51 9. When restricted to [0,a],[a,b],and [b,1], respectively, it equals the positive linear maps of these intervals onto [O,c],[c,d],and [d,1],respectively. It follows at once that ${ \pmb k } _ { c , d } \circ { \pmb p }$ equals $k _ { a , b }$ But p is a path in / from Oto l; and so is the identity map $i : I  I$ Hence,there is a path homotopy P in/ between p and i.Then ${ \pmb k } _ { c , d } \circ { \pmb P }$ is a path homotopy in X between $k _ { a , b }$ and $k _ { c , d }$

<!-- image-->  
What has this to do with associativity? A great deal. For the product $f * ( g * h )$ is exactly the trple product $k _ { a , b }$ in the case where $a = 1 / 2$ and $b = 3 / 4$ ,as you can check,while the product $( f * g ) * h$ equals $k _ { c , d }$ in the case where $c = 1 / 4$ and $d = 1 / 2$ Therefore these two products are path homotopic.

The argument just used to prove associativity goes through for any finite product of paths.Roughly speaking,it says that as far as the path-homotopy class of the result is concerned,it doesn't matter how you chop up the interval when you form the product of paths! This result willbe useful to us later, so we state it formally as a theorem here:

Theorem 51.3. Let f be a path in X,and let $a _ { 0 } , \ldots , a _ { n }$ be numbers such that $0 = a _ { 0 } < a _ { 1 } < \cdots < a _ { n } = 1$ . Let $f _ { i } : I \to X$ be the path that equals the positive linear map of I onto $\left[ a _ { i - 1 } , a _ { i } \right]$ followed by f.Then

$$
[ f ] = [ f _ { 1 } ] * \cdot \cdot * [ f _ { n } ] .
$$

## Exercises

1. Show that if $h , h ^ { \prime } \cdot X \to Y$ are homotopic and k, $k ^ { \prime } : Y \to z$ are homotopic, then k o h and $\pmb { k } ^ { \prime } \circ \pmb { h } ^ { \prime }$ are homotopic.

2.Given spaces X and Y,let $[ X , Y ]$ denote the set of homotopy classes of maps of X into Y.

(a） Let $I = [ 0 , 1 ]$ Show that for any X,the set [X,I] has a single element.

(b) Show that if Y is path connected,the set [1,Y] has a single element.

3. A space X is said to be contractible if the identity map $i _ { X } : X \to X$ is nulhomotopic.

(a） Show that I and R are contractible.

(b） Show that a contractible space is path connected.

(c） Show that if Y is contractible,then for any X,the set $[ X , Y ]$ has a single element.

(d) Show that if X is contractible and Y is path connected,then [X,Y] has a single element.

## \$52 The Fundamental Group

The set of path-homotopy classes of paths in a space X does not form a group under the operation \* because the product of two path-homotopy classes is not always defined. But suppose we pick out a point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ of X to serve as a "base point" and restrict ourselves to those paths that begin and end at $x _ { 0 }$ The set of these path-homotopy classes does form a group under \* .It will be called the fundamental group of X.

In this section,we shall study the fundamental group and derive some of its properties.In particular,we shall show that the group is a topological invariant of the space X,the fact that is of crucial importance in using it to study homeomorphism problems.

Let us first review some terminology from group theory. Suppose G and $\pmb { G } ^ { \prime }$ are groups,written multiplicatively A homomorphism $f : G \to G ^ { \prime }$ is a map such that $f ( x \cdot y ) = f ( x ) \cdot f ( y )$ for all x,y; it automatically satisfies the equations $f ( e ) = e ^ { \prime }$ and $f ( x ^ { - 1 } ) = f ( x ) ^ { - 1 }$ ,where e and $\scriptstyle { e ^ { \prime } }$ are the identities of G and $\bar { G ^ { \prime } }$ ,respectively,and the exponent-l denotes the inverse. The kernel of f is the set $f ^ { - 1 } ( e ^ { \prime } )$ ；it is a subgroup of G. The image of $f .$ ,simularly,isasubgroup of $\pmb { G } ^ { \prime }$ . The homomorphism f is called a monomorphism if it is injective (or equivalently, if the kernel of f consists of e alone). It is called an epimorphism if it is surjective; and it is called an isomorphism if it is bijective

Suppose G is a group and H is a subgroup of G. Let x H denote the set of all products $\pmb { x h } .$ for $h \in H ;$ it is called a left coset of H in G.The collection of all such cosets forms a partition of G.Similarly, the collection of all right cosets $\pmb { H } \pmb { x }$ of H in G forms a partition of G.We call H a normal subgroup of G if $\pmb { x } \cdot \pmb { h } \cdot \pmb { x } ^ { - 1 } \in H$ for each ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb G }$ and each $h \in H$ . In this case,we have $x H = H x$ for each x,so that our two partitions of $G$ are the same. We denote this partition by $G / H ;$ if one defines

$$
( x \pmb { H } ) \cdot ( y \pmb { H } ) = ( x \cdot y ) \pmb { H } ,
$$

one obtains a well-defined operation on $G / H$ that makes it a group.This group is called the quotient of $G$ by H. The map $f : G \to G / H$ carrying x to $x H$ is an epimorphism with kernel H Conversely,if $f : G \to G ^ { \prime }$ is an epimorphis m, then its kernel N is a normal subgroup of $_ { G }$ and $f$ induces an isomorphism $G / N  G ^ { \prime }$ that carries $_ { x N }$ to $f ( x )$ for each $x \in G$

If the subgroup H of $_ { G }$ is not normal, it will stillbe convenient to use the symbol $G / H$ ;we will use it to denote the collection of right cosets of H in $G .$

Now we define the fundamental group.

Definition.Let X be a space; let $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ be a point of X.A path in X that begins and ends at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ is called a loop based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ .The set of path homotopy classes of loops based at $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ ,with the operation \*, is called the fundamental group of X relative to the base point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ It is denoted by $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$

It follows from Theorem 51.2 that the operation \*，when restricted to this set, Satisfies the axioms for a group. Given two loops $f$ and g based at $x _ { 0 }$ ,the product f\*g is always defined and is a loop based at xo． Associativity,the existence of an identity element $[ e _ { x _ { 0 } } ]$ ,and the existence of an inverse $[ \bar { f } ]$ for $[ f ]$ are immediate.

Sometimes this group is called the first homotopy group of X, which term implies that there is a second homotopy group. There are indeed groups $\pi _ { n } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,but we shall not study them in this book.They are part of the general subject called homotopy theory.

EXAMPLE1Let $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ denote euclidean n-space.Then $\pmb { \pi } _ { 1 } ( \mathbb { R } ^ { n } , x _ { 0 } )$ is the tnvial group (the group consisting of the identity alone).For if f is a loop in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ based at $\pmb { x 0 }$ the straight-line homotopy is a path homotopy between fand the constant path at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ More generally,if X is any convex subset of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ 、then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is the trnvial group.In particular,the unit ball $B ^ { n }$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$

$$
B ^ { n } = \{ { \bf x } \mid x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } + + + x _ { n } ^ { 2 } \leq 1 \} ,
$$

has trivial fundamental group.

An immediate question one asks is the extent to which the fundamental group depends on the base point. We consider that question now.

Definition.Let α be a path in X from $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ 0 $x _ { 1 }$ . We define a map

$$
\hat { \pmb { \alpha } } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )
$$

by the equation

$$
\hat { \alpha } ( [ f ] ) = [ \bar { \alpha } ] * [ f ] * [ \alpha ] .
$$

The map $\hat { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,which we call“α-hat,"is well-defined because the operation \* is welldefined.Iff isa loop based at $x _ { 0 }$ ,then $\bar { \alpha } * ( f * \alpha )$ is a loop based at $x _ { 1 }$ . Hence $\hat { \pmb { \alpha } }$ maps $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ into $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )$ ,as desired; note that it depends only on the path-homotopy class of α. It is pictured in Figure 52 1.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 52.1

Theorem 52.1. The map α is a group isomorphism.

Proof.To show that $\hat { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is a homomorphism, we compute

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \hat { \alpha } ( [ f ] ) * \hat { \alpha } ( [ g ] ) = ( [ \bar { \alpha } ] * [ f ] * [ \alpha ] ) * ( [ \bar { \alpha } ] * [ g ] * [ \alpha ] ) } } \\ { { \qquad = [ \bar { \alpha } ] * [ f ] * [ g ] * [ \alpha ] } } \\ { { \qquad = \hat { \alpha } ( [ f ] * [ g ] ) . } } \end{array}
$$

To show that $\hat { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is an isomorphism,we show that if $\pmb { \beta }$ denotes the path $\bar { \pmb { \alpha } }$ which is the reverse of α,then $\hat { \pmb { \beta } }$ Is an inverse for $\hat { \pmb { \alpha } } .$ ，We compute,for each element [h] of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )$

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { \hat { \beta } ( [ h ] ) = [ \bar { \beta } ] * [ h ] * [ \beta ] = [ \alpha ] * [ h ] * [ \bar { \alpha } ] , } } \\ { { \hat { \alpha } ( \hat { \beta } ( [ h ] ) ) = [ \bar { \alpha } ] * ( [ \alpha ] * [ h ] * [ \bar { \alpha } ] ) * [ \alpha ] = [ h ] . } } \end{array}
$$

A similar computation shows that $\hat { \beta } ( \hat { \alpha } ( [ f ] ) ) = [ f ]$ for each $[ f ] \in \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$

Corollary 52.2. If X is path connected and $\pmb { x } _ { 0 }$ and $x _ { 1 }$ are two points of $\pmb { X } ,$ then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is isomorphic to $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )$

Suppose that X is a topological space.Let C be the path component of X containing $x _ { 0 }$ It is easy to see that $\pi _ { 1 } ( C , x _ { 0 } ) = \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ ,since all loops and homotopies in X that are based at $x _ { 0 }$ must lie in the subspace $^ { c , }$ Thus $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ depends on only the path component of X containing $x _ { 0 } ;$ it gives us no information whatever about the rest of X.For this reason,it is usual to deal with only path-connected spaces when studying the fundamental group

If X is path connected,all the groups $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x )$ are isomorphic,so it is tempting to try to “identify"all these groups with one another and to speak simply of the fundamental group of the space $\pmb { \chi }$ ，without reference to base point. The difficulty with this approach is that there is no natural way of identifying $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ with $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )$ different paths α and $\pmb { \beta }$ from $\pmb { x 0 }$ 0 $x _ { 1 }$ may give rise to different isomorphisms between these groups.For this reason, omutting the base point can lead to error.

It turns out that the isomorphism of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ with $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )$ is independent of path if and only if the fundamental group is abelian.(See Exercise 3.）This is a stringent requirement on the space X.

Definition.A space X is said to be simply connected if it is a path-connected space and if $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is the trivial (one-element) group for some $x _ { 0 } \in X$ ,and hence for every $x _ { 0 } \in X$ .We often express the fact that $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is the trivial group by writing $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) = 0$

Lemma 52.3. In a simply connected space $\pmb { \chi }$ ,any two paths having the same initial and final points are path homotopic.

Proof. Let α and $\pmb { \beta }$ be two paths from xo to $x _ { 1 }$ Then $\alpha * { \bar { \beta } }$ is defined and is a loop on X based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ 、Since X is simply connected,this loop is path homotopic to the constant loop at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ Then

$$
[ { \alpha } * { \bar { \beta } } ] * [ { \dot { \bar { \beta } } } ] = [ e _ { x _ { 0 } } ] * [ \beta ] ,
$$

from which it follows that $[ { \pmb { \alpha } } ] = [ \beta ]$

It is intuitively clear that the fundamental group is a topological invariant of the space X.A convenient way to prove this fact formally is to introduce the notion of the “homomorphism induced by a continuous map."

Suppose that $h : X \to Y$ is a continuous map that carries the point xo of X to the point $y _ { 0 }$ of Y.We often denote this fact by writing

$$
h : ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow ( Y , y _ { 0 } ) .
$$

If f is a loop in X based at xo,then the composite h o $f : I \to Y$ is a loopin Y based atyo.The correspondence $f  h \circ f$ thus gives rise to a map carrying $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ into $\pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ .We define it formally as follows:

Definition. Let h . $( X , x _ { 0 } )  ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ be a continuous map. Define

$$
{ h _ { * } } \ . \ \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )
$$

by the equation

$$
h _ { * } ( [ f ] ) = [ h \circ f ] .
$$

The map $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$ is called the homomorphism induced by h,relative to the base point $x _ { 0 }$

The map $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$ is well-defined,for if F is a path homotopy between the paths f and $\pmb { f ^ { \prime } }$ then $h \circ F$ is a path homotopy between the paths h o fand $\scriptstyle h \circ f ^ { \prime }$ The fact that $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$ is a homomorphism follows from the equation

$$
( h \circ f ) * ( h \circ g ) = h \circ ( f * g ) .
$$

The homomorphism h\* depends not only on the map $h : X \to Y$ but also on the choice of the base point $x _ { 0 }$ (Once $x _ { 0 }$ is chosen, $y _ { 0 }$ is determined by h.） So some notatonal difficulty will arise if we want to consider several different base points for $\pmb { \chi }$ If $x _ { 0 }$ and $x _ { 1 }$ are two different points of $\pmb { \chi } ,$ ，we cannot use the same symbol $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$ to stand for two different homomorphisms,one having domain $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ and the other having domain $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } )$ .Even if X is path connected,so these groups are isomorphic,they are still not the same group.In such a case,we shall use the notation

$$
( h _ { x _ { 0 } } ) _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )
$$

for the first homomorphism and $( h _ { x _ { 1 } } )$ \*for the second.If there is only one base point under consideration,we shall omit mention of the base point and denote the induced homomorphism merely by $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$

The induced homomorphism has two properties that are crucial in the applications. They are called its “functorial properties"and are given in the following theorem:

Theorem 52.4. $I f h : ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \to ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ and $k : ( Y , y _ { 0 } ) \to ( Z , z _ { 0 } )$ are continuous, then $( k \circ h ) _ { * } = k _ { * } \circ h _ { * } I f i : ( X , x _ { 0 } )  ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is the identity map,then $i _ { * }$ is the identity homomorphism.

Proof.The proof is a triviality.Bydefinition,

$$
( k \circ h ) _ { * } ( [ f ] ) = [ ( k \circ h ) \circ f ] ,
$$

$$
( k _ { * } \circ h _ { * } ) ( [ f ] ) = k _ { * } ( h _ { * } ( [ f ] ) ) = k _ { * } ( [ h \circ f ] ) = [ k \circ ( h \circ f ) ] .
$$

Simularly, $i _ { * } ( [ f ] ) = [ i \circ f ] = [ f ]$

Corollary 52.5. $I f h : ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \to ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ ls a homeomorphusm of X with Y,then $h _ { * }$ is an isomorphism of $\dot { \pi } _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ with $\pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$

Proof. Let $k \cdot ( Y , y _ { 0 } )  ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ be the inverse of h. Then $k _ { * } \circ h _ { * } = ( k \circ h ) _ { * } = i _ { * }$ where i is the identity map of $( X , x _ { 0 } )$ and h.o $k _ { * } = ( h \circ k ) _ { * } = j _ { * }$ ,where $j$ is the identity map of $( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ . Since $i _ { * }$ and $j _ { \ast }$ are the identity homomorphisms of the groups $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ and $\pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ ,respectively, ${ \pmb k } _ { \ast }$ is the inverse of $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$

## Exercises

1. A subset A of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ is said to be star convex if for some point $\pmb { a } _ { 0 }$ of A, all the line segments joining ao to other points of A lie in A.

(a）Find a star convex set that is not convex.

(b) Show that if A is star convex,A is simply connected.

2.Let α be a path in X from xo to $\pmb { x } _ { 1 } \hbar$ let $\pmb { \beta }$ be a path in X from $x _ { 1 }$ to $\pmb { x } _ { 2 }$ . Show that if $\gamma = \alpha * \beta$ then $\hat { \gamma } = \hat { \beta } \circ \hat { \alpha }$

3. Let $x _ { 0 }$ and $x _ { 1 }$ be points of the path-connected space $\pmb { \chi } .$ Show that $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is abelian if and only if for every pair α and $\beta$ of paths from $x _ { 0 }$ $x _ { 1 }$ , we have $\hat { \pmb { \alpha } } = \hat { \pmb { \beta } } .$

4. Let $A \subset X ;$ suppose $r \cdot X \to A$ is a continuous map such that $r ( a ) = a$ for each $a \in A$ (The map r is called a retraction of $\pmb { \chi }$ onto A) If $a _ { 0 } \in A$ , show that

$$
r _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( A , a _ { 0 } )
$$

is surjective.

5.Let A be a subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ;let $h : ( A , a _ { 0 } )  ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$ . Show that if h is extendable to a continuous map of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ into Y, then $\pmb { h } _ { \ast }$ is the trivial homomorphism (the homomorphism that maps everything to the identity element).

6.Show that if X is path connected,the homomorphism induced by a continuous map is independent of base point,up to isomorphisms of the groups involved. More precisely, let $h : X \to Y$ be continuous,with $h ( x _ { 0 } ) = y _ { 0 }$ and $h ( x _ { 1 } ) = y _ { 1 }$ Let α bea path in X from $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ to $x _ { 1 }$ ,and let $\beta = h$ o α. Show that

$$
\hat { \beta } \circ ( h _ { x _ { 0 } } ) _ { * } = ( h _ { x _ { 1 } } ) _ { * } \circ \hat { \alpha } .
$$

This equation expresses the fact that the following diagram of maps “commutes."

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \xrightarrow { ( h _ { \tau _ { 0 } } ) _ { * } } \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } ) } \\ & { \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \quad \bigg \downarrow \hat { \pmb { \alpha } } } \\ & { \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } ) \xrightarrow { ( h _ { x _ { 1 } } ) _ { * } } \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 1 } ) } \end{array}
$$

7. Let $\pmb { G }$ be a topological group with operation ·and identity element $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ Let $\Omega ( G , x _ { 0 } )$ denote the set of all loops in $\pmb { G }$ based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ If $f , g \ \in \ \Omega ( G , x _ { 0 } )$ let us define a loop $f \otimes g$ by the rule

$$
( f \otimes g ) ( s ) = f ( s ) \cdot g ( s ) .
$$

(a） Show that this operation makes the set $\Omega ( G , x _ { 0 } )$ into a group.

(b) Show that this operation induces a group operation &on $\pi _ { 1 } ( G , x _ { 0 } )$

(c） Show that the two group operations \* and $\otimes$ on $\pi _ { 1 } ( G , x _ { 0 } )$ are the same.

[Hint: Compute $( f * e _ { x _ { 0 } } ) \otimes ( e _ { x _ { 0 } } * g ) \ : \rfloor$

(d) Show that $\pi _ { 1 } ( G , x _ { 0 } )$ is abelian.

## \$53 Covering Spaces

We have shown that any convex subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ has a trivial fundamental group; we turn now to the task of computing some fundamental groups that are not trivial. One of the most useful tools for this purpose is the notion of covering space,which we introduce in this section. Covering spaces are also important in the study of Riemann surfaces and complex manifolds.(See [A-S].） We shall study them in more detail in Chapter 13.

Definition. Let $p \_ E  B$ be a continuous surjective map. The open set U of B is said to be evenly covered by p if the inverse image $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ can be written as the union of disjoint open sets $V _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ in E such that for each α,the restriction of p to $V _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is a homeomorphism of $V _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ onto U The collection $\{ V _ { \pmb { \alpha } } \}$ will be called a partition of $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ into slices

If U is an open set that is evenly covered by p,we often picture the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ as a“stack of pancakes."each having the same size and shape as U,floating in the air above $U { \mathrm { : } }$ ：the map p squashes them all down onto U. See Figure 53.1. Note that if U is evenly covered by p and W is an open set contained in $\boldsymbol { U }$ 、then W is also evenly covered by p.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 53.1

Definition. Let $p \_ E  B$ be continuous and surjective.If every point b of B has a neighborhood U that is evenly covered by p、then p is called a covering map,and E is said to be a covering space of B

Note that if $p \ ^ { \cdot } \ E \ \to \ B$ is a covering map,then for each $\textbf { \textit { b } } \in \textbf { \textit { B } }$ the subspace $p ^ { - 1 } ( b )$ of E has the discrete topology For each slice $V _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is open in E and intersects the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( b )$ in a single point; therefore,this point is open in $p ^ { - 1 } ( b )$

Note also that if $p : E  B$ is a covering map,then p is an open map.For suppose A is an open set of E.Given $x \in p ( A )$ ,choose a neighborhood U of x that is evenly covered by p Let $\{ V _ { \alpha } \}$ be a partition of $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ into slices.There is a point y of A such that $p ( \boldsymbol { y } ) = \boldsymbol { x } ;$ let $V _ { \beta }$ be the slice containing y. The set $V _ { \beta } \cap A$ is open In E and hence open in $V _ { \beta }$ ，because p maps $V _ { \beta }$ homeomorphically onto U,the set $p ( V _ { \beta } \cap A )$ is open in U and hence open in B;it is thus a neighborhood of x contained in $\pmb { p } ( A )$ ,as desired.

EXAMPLE1． Let X be any space; let $i : X \to X$ be the identity map. Then i is a covering map (of the most trivial sort).More generallyletEbe the space $X \times \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ consisting of n disjoint copies of X.The map $p \cdot { \pmb { E } }  { \pmb X }$ given by $p ( { \pmb x } , i ) = { \pmb x }$ for all i is again a (rather trivial) covering map.In this case,we can picture the entire space E as a stack of pancakes over X.

In practice,one often restricts oneself to covering spaces that are path connected, to eliminate trivial coverings of the pancake-stack variety. An example of such a nontrivial covering space is the following.

Theorem 53.1. The map $p \cdot \mathbb { R }  s ^ { \iota }$ given by the equation

$$
\begin{array} { r } { p ( x ) = ( \cos 2 \pi x , \sin 2 \pi x ) } \end{array}
$$

is a covering map.

One can picture p as a function that wraps the real line R around the circ le $s ^ { 1 }$ ,and in the process maps each interval $\{ n , n + 1 \}$ onto $s ^ { 1 }$

Proof.The fact that p is a covering map comes from elementary properties of the sine and cosine functions. Consider, for example,the subset U of $\pmb { S } ^ { \mathrm { i } }$ consisting of those points having positive first coordinate. The set $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ consists of those points x for which cos π x is positive,that is,it is the union of the intervals

$$
V _ { n } = ( n - { \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 4 } } } , n + { \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 4 } } } ) ,
$$

for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z }$ See Figure 53.2. Now,restricted to any closed interval $\bar { V } _ { n }$ ,the map p is injective_because sin $2 \pi x$ is strictly monotonic on such an interval． Furthermore, p carries $\bar { V } _ { n }$ surjectively onto $\bar { \upsilon }$ ,and $V _ { n }$ to $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ ,by_the intermediate value theorem. Since $\bar { V } _ { n }$ is compact, $p | \bar { V } _ { n }$ is a homeomorphism of $\bar { V } _ { n }$ with $\bar { \upsilon }$ . In particular, $p | V _ { n }$ isa homeomorphism of $V _ { n }$ with U

<!-- image-->  
Figure 53.2

Simular arguments can be applied to the intersectons of ${ s } ^ { 1 }$ with the upper and lower open half-planes,and with the open left-hand half-plane. These Open sets cover $s ^ { 1 }$ ,and each of them is evenly covered by $\pmb { p } .$ Hence $p : \mathbb { R }  s ^ { 1 }$ is a covering map.

If $p \cdot E  B$ is a coveringmap,then p is a local homeomorphism of E with B. That is, each point $\pmb { e }$ d $\pmb { \cal E }$ has a neighborhood that is mapped homeomorphicall by p Onto an open subset of B.The condition that $\pmb { p }$ be a local homeomorphism does not suffice, however, to ensure that $\pmb { p }$ is a covering map,as the following example shows.

EXAMPLE 2.The map $p . \mathbb { R } _ { + }  s ^ { 1 }$ given by the equation

$$
\begin{array} { r } { p ( x ) = ( \cos 2 \pi x , \sin 2 \pi x ) } \end{array}
$$

is surjecuve,and it is alocal homeomorphism.See Figure53.3. But it is not a covering map,for the point $b _ { 0 } = ( 1 , 0 )$ has no neighborhood U that is evenly covered by $\pmb { p } .$ The typical neighborhood U of bo has an inverse image consisting of small neighborhoods $\nu _ { \pmb { n } }$ of each integer n for $\pmb { n } > 0 .$ ,along with asmall interval $\pmb { V _ { 0 } }$ of the form $( 0 , \epsilon )$ .Each of the intervals $\nu _ { \pi }$ for $\pmb { n } > 0$ is mapped homeomorphically onto $\boldsymbol { v }$ by the map ${ \pmb p } ,$ but the interval $\nu _ { 0 }$ is only imbedded in $\pmb { U }$ by $\pmb { p } .$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 53.3

EXAMPLE 3．The preceding example might lead you to think that the real line R is the only connected covering space of the circle $\setminuss ^ { 1 }$ .This is not so.Consider,for example,the map $p \cdot S ^ { 1 }  S ^ { 1 }$ given in equations by

$$
p ( z ) = z ^ { 2 } .
$$

[Here we consider $S ^ { 1 }$ as the subset of the complex plane C consisting of those complex numbers z with $| z | = 1 1$ We leave it to you tocheck that $p$ is a covering map.

Example 2 shows that the map obtained by restricting a covering map may not be a coverng map. Here is one situation where it willbe a covering map:

Theorem 53.2. Let $p : E  B$ be a covering map. If $\scriptstyle B _ { 0 }$ is a subspace of B,and if $E _ { 0 } = p ^ { - 1 } ( B _ { 0 } )$ ，then the map $p _ { 0 } : E _ { 0 } \to B _ { 0 }$ obtained by restricting $\pmb { p }$ is a covering map.

Proof.Given $b _ { 0 } \in B _ { 0 }$ ,let $\boldsymbol { \imath }$ be an open set in B containing $b _ { 0 }$ that is evenl y covered by $p ;$ let $\{ V _ { \alpha } \}$ be a partition of $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ into slices.Then $U \cap B _ { 0 }$ is a neighborhood of $b _ { 0 }$ in $B _ { 0 }$ ,and the sets $V _ { \pmb { \alpha } } \cap \pmb { E } _ { 0 }$ are disjoint open sets in ${ \pmb E } _ { 0 }$ whose union is $p ^ { - 1 } ( U \cap B _ { 0 } )$ and each is mapped homeomorphically onto U ∩ Bo by p.

Theorem 53.3.It $p : E  B$ and $p ^ { \prime } : E ^ { \prime } \to B ^ { \prime }$ are covering maps,then

$$
p \times p ^ { \prime } \colon E \times E ^ { \prime } \to B \times B ^ { \prime }
$$

is a covering map.

Proof.Given $\textbf { \textit { b } } \in \textbf { \textit { B } }$ and $\pmb { b } ^ { \prime } \in \pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ let U and $U ^ { \prime }$ be neighborhoods of b and $\pmb { b } ^ { \prime }$ respectively,that are evenly covered bypand $p ^ { \prime }$ respectively.Let $\{ V _ { \alpha } \}$ and $\{ V _ { \beta } ^ { \prime } \}$ be partitons of $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ and $( p ^ { \prime } ) ^ { - 1 } ( U ^ { \prime } )$ ,respectively, into slices. Then the inverse image under $p \times p ^ { \prime }$ of the open set $U \times U ^ { \prime }$ is the union of all the sets $V _ { \alpha } \times V _ { \beta } ^ { \prime } ,$ These are disjoint open sets of $\pmb { { \cal E } } \times \pmb { { \cal E } } ^ { \prime }$ ,and each is mapped homeomorphically onto $v \times U ^ { \prime }$ by $\pmb { p } \times \pmb { p } ^ { \prime }$ ■

EXAMPLE 4.Consider the space $T = S ^ { 1 } \times S ^ { 1 }$ , it is called the torus The product map

$$
p \times p \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \longrightarrow s ^ { 1 } \times s ^ { 1 }
$$

is a covenng of the torus by the plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ，where p denotes the covering map of Theorem 53l Each of the unit squares $[ n , n + 1 ] \times [ m , m + 1 ]$ gets wrapped by $p \times p$ entirely around the torus. See Figure 53 4

<!-- image-->  
Figure 53.4  
In this figure,we have piciured the torus not as the product $S ^ { 1 } \times S ^ { 1 }$ ,which is a subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 4 }$ and thus difficult to visualize,but as the famuliar doughnut-shaped surface D in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ Obtained by rotating the circle $c _ { 1 }$ in the xz-plane of radius $\frac { 1 } { 3 }$ centered at $( 1 , 0 , 0 )$ about the z-axis.It is not hard to see that $s ^ { 1 } \times s ^ { 1 }$ is homeomorphic with the surface D Let $c _ { 2 }$ be the circle of radius l in the xy-plane centered at the ongin. Then let us map $C _ { 1 } \times C _ { 2 }$ into D by defining $f ( a \times b )$ to be that point into which a is carried when one rotates the circle $c _ { 1 }$ about the z-axis until its center hits the point b See Figure S3.5. The map f will be a homeomorphism of $C _ { 1 } \times C _ { 2 }$ with $\pmb { D } ,$ ,as you can check mentally. If you wish, you can wnte equations for $f$ and check continuity, injectivity,and surjecuvity directly. (Continuity of $f ^ { - 1 }$ will follow from compactness of $C _ { 1 } \times C _ { 2 } . )$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 53.5

EXAMPLE 5.Consider the covering map $\pmb { p } \times \pmb { p }$ of the preceding example. Let $b _ { 0 }$ denote the point $p ( 0 )$ of $s ^ { 1 }$ ; and let $\scriptstyle B _ { 0 }$ denote the subspace

$$
B _ { 0 } = ( S ^ { 1 } \times b _ { 0 } ) \cup ( b _ { 0 } \times S ^ { 1 } )
$$

of $s ^ { 1 } \times s ^ { 1 }$ . Then $\scriptstyle B _ { 0 }$ is the union of two circles that have a point in common,we sometimes call it the figure-eight space The space $E _ { 0 } = p ^ { - 1 } ( B _ { 0 } )$ is the“infinite grd"

$$
E _ { 0 } = ( \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { Z } ) \cup ( \mathbb { Z } \times \mathbb { R } )
$$

pictured in Figure S3 4. The map $p _ { 0 } : E _ { 0 } \to B _ { 0 }$ obtained by restricting $p \times p$ is thus a covening map.

The infinite grid is but one covering space of the figure eight; we shall see others later on.

EXAMPLE 6Consider the covering map

$$
p \times i : \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } _ { + } \longrightarrow s ^ { 1 } \times \mathbb { R } _ { + } ,
$$

where i is the identuty map of $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ and $\pmb { p }$ is the map of Theorem S3 I.If we take the Standard homeomorphism of $\hat { s } ^ { 1 } \times \mathbb { R } _ { + }$ with $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbb { 0 }$ ,sending $x \times t$ to tx,the composite gives us a covering

$$
\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } _ { + } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }
$$

of the punctured plane by the open upper half-plane. It is pictured in Figure S3.6. This covering map appears in the study of complex variables as the Riemann surface corresponding to the complex loganthm function.