# Countability and Separation Axioms

The concepts we are going to introduce now,unlike compactness and connectedness, do not arise naturally from the study of calculus and analysis.They arise instead from a deeper study of topology itself. Such problems as imbedding a given space in a metric space or in a compact Hausdorff space are basically problems of topology rather than analysis.These particular problems have solutions that involve the countability and separation axioms.

We have already introduced the first countability axiom; it arose in connection with our study of convergent sequences in \$21.We have also studied one of the separation axioms—the Hausdorff axiom,and mentioned another—the $\pmb { T } _ { \parallel }$ axiom. In this chapter we shall introduce other,and stronger,axioms like these and explore some of their consequences. Our basic goal is to prove the Urysohn metrization theorem. It says that if a topological space X satisfies a certain countability axiom (the second) and a certain separation axiom (the regularity axiom),then X can be imbedded in a metric space and is thus metrizable.

Another imbedding theorem, important to geometers,appears in the last section of the chapter. Given a space that is a compact manifold (the higher-dimensional analogue of a surface),we show that it can be imbedded in some finite-dimensional euclidean space.

## \$30 The Countability Axioms

Recall the definition we gave in \$21.

Definition.A space X is said to have a countable basis at x if there is acountable collection B of neighborhoods of x such that each neighborhood of x contains at least one of the elements of B.A space that has a countable basis at each of its points is said to satisfy the first countability axiom,or to be first-countable.

We have already noted that every metrizable space satisfies this axiom; see \$21.

The most useful fact concerning spaces that satisfy this axiom is the fact that in such a space, convergent sequences are adequate to detect limit points of sets and to check continuity of functions. We have noted this before; now we state it formally as a theorem:

Theorem 30.1． Let X be a topological space.

(a) Let A be a subset of X. If there is a sequence of points of A converging to x, then $x \in { \bar { A } }$ :the converse holds if X is first-countable.

(b) Let $f : X \to Y$ .If f is continuous,then for every convergent sequence $x _ { n } \to x$ in X,the sequence $f ( x _ { n } )$ converges to $f ( x )$ .The converse holds if X is firstcountable.

The proof is a direct generalization of the proof given in \$21 under the hypothesis of metrizability, so it will not be repeated here.

Of much greater importance than the first countability axiom is the following:

Definition.If a space X has a countable basis for its topology,then X is said to satisfy the second countability axiom,or to be second-countable.

Obviously,the second axiom implies the first: if B is a countable basis for the topology of X,then the subset of B consisting of those basis elements containing the point x is a countable basis at x. The second axiom is,in fact,much stronger than the first; it is so strong that not even every metnc space satisfies it.

Why then is this second axiom interesting? Well,for one thing,many familiar spaces do satisfy it. For another,it is a crucial hypothesis used in proving such theorems as the Urysohn metrization theorem,as we shall see.

EXAMPLE1 The real line R has a countable basis-the collection of all open intervals (a,b) with rational end points.Likewise. $\pmb { \mathbb { R } ^ { n } }$ has a countable basis-the collection of all products of intervals having rational end points.Even $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ has a countable basis--the collection of all products $\textstyle \prod _ { n \in { \pmb { Z } } _ { + } } U _ { n }$ .where $U _ { n }$ is an open interval with rational end points for finitelymany values of n,and ${ \cal U } _ { n } = \mathbb { R }$ forall other values of n.

EXAMPLE 2In the uniform topology, $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ Satisfies the first countability axiom (being metrizable).However, it does not satisfy the second.To venfy this fact, we first show that if X is a space having a countable basis B,then any discrete Subspace A of X must be countable Choose,for each $a \in A$ ,a basis element $B _ { \alpha }$ that intersects A in the point a alone. If a and b are distinct points of A,the sets $B _ { a }$ and $\pmb { B _ { b } }$ are different,since the first Contains a and the second does not It follows that the map $a  B _ { a }$ is an injection of A into B,so A musi be countable.

Now we nole thal ihe subspace A of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ Consisling of all sequences of ${ \mathfrak { V } } { \mathfrak { s } }$ and $\mathbf { \nabla } ^ { 1 } \mathbf { \dot { s } }$ is unCouniable；and it has the discreie topology because $\bar { \rho } ( a , b ) = 1$ for any two distinct pointsa and b of A．Therefore,in the uniform topology $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ does nol have a countable basis.

Both countability axioms are well behaved withrespect to theoperations of taking subspaces or countable products:

Theorem 30.2. A subspace of a first-countable space is first-countable,and a countable product of first-countable spaces is first-countable.A subspace of a secondcountable space is second-countable,and a countable product of second-countable spaces is second-countable.

Proof.Consider the second countability axiom.If B is a countable basis for X,then $\{ B \cap A \mid B \in { \mathcal { B } } \}$ is a countable basis for the subspace A of X If ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { i }$ is a countable basis for the space $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ ,then the collection of all products $\Pi U _ { \iota }$ ，where $U _ { i } ~ \in ~ \mathcal { B } _ { i }$ for finitely many values of i and $U _ { i } = \pmb { X } _ { i }$ for all other values of i,is a countable basis for n xi

The proof for the first countability axiom is similar.

Two consequences of the second countability axiom that will be useful to us later are given in the following theorem. First,a definition:

Definition.A subset A of a space X is said to be dense in X if ${ \bar { A } } = X$

Theorem 30.3. Suppose that X has a countable basis. Then:

(a)Every open covering of X contains a countable subcollection covering X.

(b) There exists a countable subset of X that is dense in X.

Proof.Let $\{ B _ { n } \}$ be a countable basis for X.

r (a)Let A be an open covering of X.For each positive integer n for which it is possible,choose an element $A _ { n }$ of $\star$ containing the basis element ${ \pmb { B _ { n } } }$ . The collection $\mathcal { A } ^ { \prime }$ of the sets $A _ { n }$ is countable,since it is indexed with a subset J of the positive integers. Furthermore,it covers X:Given a point $x \in X$ ，we can choose an element A of A containing x.Since A is open,there is a basis element $\scriptstyle B _ { n }$ such that $x \ \in \ B _ { n } \ \subset \ A$ Because $B _ { n }$ lies in an element of A,the index n belongs to the set J,so $A _ { n }$ is defined; since $\pmb { A _ { n } }$ contains $B _ { n }$ ,it contains x．Thus $\mathcal { A } ^ { \prime }$ is a countable subcollection of A that covers X.

(b) From each nonempty basis element $B _ { n }$ ,choose a point $x _ { n }$ . Let D be the set consisting of the points $x _ { n }$ .Then D is dense in X: Given any point x of X,every basis element containing x intersects D,so x belongs to $\bar { D }$

The two properties listed in Theorem 30.3 are sometimes taken as alternative countability axioms．A space for which every open covering contains a countable subcovering is called a Lindelof space A space having a countable dense subset is often said to be separable (an unfortunate choice of terminology).† Weaker in general than the second countability axiom,each of these properties is equivalent to the second countability axiom when the space is metrizable (see Exercise 5). They are less important than the second countability axiom,but you should be aware of their existence, for they are sometimes useful. It is often easier,for instance,to show that a space $\pmb { \chi }$ has a countable dense subset than it is to show that X has a countable basis.If the space is metrizable (as it usually is in analysis),it follows that X is second-countable as well.

We shall not use these properties to prove any theorems,but one of them-the Lindelof condition-will be useful in dealing with some examples. They are not as well behaved as one might wish under the operations of taking subspaces and cartesian products,as we shall see in the examples and exercises that follow.

EXAMPLE3.The space $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } _ { \pmb { \ell } }$ satisfies allihe couniability axioms but the second.

Given ${ \pmb x } \in \mathbb { R } _ { \pmb \ell }$ ,the set of all basis elements of the form $[ x , x + 1 / n )$ is a countable basis at x.And it is easy to see that the rauonal numbers are dense in $\scriptstyle { \mathbb { R } } _ { t }$

To see that $\scriptstyle { \mathbb { R } } _ { t }$ has no countable basis,let B be a basis for $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ Choose for each x,an element $\pmb { B } _ { \mathrm { Y } }$ of B such that $x \in B _ { \mathrm { r } } \subset [ x , x + 1 ) . \ \mathsf { I f } \ x \neq y$ then $B _ { x } \neq B _ { y }$ ,since x = inf $B _ { x }$ and $y =$ inf $\pmb { B } _ { \pmb { \nu } }$ .Therefore,B must be uncountable

To show that $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ is Lindelof requires more work. It willsuffice to show that every open covering of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell }$ by basis elements contains a countable subcollection covering $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ .(You can check this） So let

$$
\mathcal { A } = \{ [ a _ { \alpha } , b _ { \alpha } ) \} _ { \alpha \in J }
$$

be a covering of $\pmb { \mathbb { R } }$ by basis elements for the lower limit topologyWe wish to find a countable subcollection that covers R.

Let C be the set

$$
C = \bigcup _ { \pmb { \alpha } \in J } ( a _ { \pmb { \alpha } } , b _ { \pmb { \alpha } } ) ,
$$

which is a subset of R.We show the set $\mathbb { R } - C$ is countable.

Let x be a point of $\mathbb { R } - c$ 、We know that .x belongs to no open interval $( a _ { \alpha } , b _ { \alpha } )$ therefore $\scriptstyle { \pmb { x } } = { \pmb { a } } _ { \pmb { \beta } }$ for some index $\pmb { \beta }$ Choose such a $\pmb { \beta }$ and then choose $\pmb { q } _ { \pmb { \tau } }$ to bea rational number belonging to the interval $( a _ { \beta } , b _ { \beta } )$ .Because $( a _ { \beta } , b _ { \beta } )$ is contained in $c .$ so is the interval $( a _ { \beta } , q _ { \mathfrak { c } } ) = ( x , q _ { \mathfrak { \lambda } } )$ .It follows that if x andy are two points of $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } - \pmb { C }$ with $x < y ,$ then $q _ { \mathrm { ~ r ~ } } < q _ { \nu }$ (For otherwise,we would have $x < y < q _ { y } \leq q _ { \mathrm { 1 } }$ ,so that y would lie in the interval $( x , q _ { \mathfrak { r } } )$ and hence in $c . )$ Therefore the map $x  q _ { \tau }$ of $\mathbb { R } - c$ Into Q is injective, so that $\mathbb { R } - c$ is countable.

Now we show that some countable subcollection of .A covers $\pmb { \mathbb { R } }$ Tu begin,choose for each element of $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } - \pmb { C }$ an element of A containing $\mathbf { i t } ;$ one obtains a countable subcollection $\star ^ { \prime }$ of $\mathbf { \star }$ that covers $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } - \pmb { C }$ 、Now take the set C and topologize it as a subspace of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ;$ in this topology, $c$ satisfies the second countability axiom. Now Cis covered by the sets $( a _ { \alpha } , b _ { \alpha } )$ ,which are open in R and hence open in $c$ Then some countable subcollection covers C.Suppose this subcollection consists of the elements $( a _ { \alpha } , b _ { \alpha } )$ for $\alpha = \alpha _ { 1 } , \alpha _ { 2 } , \ldots$ Then the collection

$$
{ \mathcal A } ^ { \prime \prime } = \{ [ a _ { \alpha } , b _ { \alpha } ) \ \vert \ \alpha = \alpha _ { 1 } , \alpha _ { 2 } , \quad . \}
$$

is a countable subcollection of A that covers the set $^ { c , }$ and $\mathbf { \mathcal { A } } ^ { \prime } \cup \mathbf { \mathcal { A } } ^ { \prime \prime }$ is a countable subcollection of A that covers $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$

EXAMPLE 4The product of two Lindelof spaces need not be Lindelof. Although the Space $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ Is Lindelof, we shall show that the product space $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } \times \mathbb { R } _ { \ell } = \mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is not. The space $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is an extremely useful example in topology called the Sorgenfrey plane

The space $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ has as basis all sets of the form $[ a , b ) \times [ c , d )$ To show it is not Lindelof. consider the subspace

$$
L = \{ x \times ( - x ) \mid x \in \mathbb { R } _ { \ell } \}
$$

It is easy to check that L is closed in $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ Let us cover $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ by the open set $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 } - L$ and by all basis elements of the form

$$
[ a , b ) \times [ - a , d ) .
$$

Each of these open sets intersects L in at most one point. Since L is uncountable,no countable subcollection covers $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ See Figure 30 1.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 30.1  
EXAMPLE5A subspace ofa Lindelof space need not beLindelof The ordered square $I _ { o } ^ { 2 }$ is compact; therefore it is Lindelof,trivially However,the subspace $\pmb { A } = \pmb { I } \times ( 0 , 1 )$ is not Lindelof.For A is the union of the disjoint sets $U _ { \mathfrak { r } } = \{ x \} \times ( 0 , 1 )$ ,each of which is open in A.This collection of sets is uncountable,and no proper subcollection covers A.

## Exercises

1. (a) A $G _ { \delta }$ set in a space X is a set A that equals acountable intersection of open sets of X. Show that in a first-countable $T _ { 1 }$ space,every one-point set is a $G _ { \delta }$ set.

(b)There is a familiar space in which every one-point set is a $G _ { \delta }$ set,which nevertheless does not satisfy the first countability axiom.What is it? The terminology here comes from the German. The“G"stands for “Gebiet." which means “open set,"and the “δ"for"Durchschnitt," which means "intersection."

2.Show that if X has a countable basis $\{ B _ { n } \}$ ,then every basis C for X contains a countable basis for X.[Hint:For every pair of indices n,m for which it is possible,choose $C _ { n , m } \in \mathcal { C }$ such that $B _ { n } \subset C _ { n , m } \subset B _ { m } . ]$

3.Let X have a countable basis; let A be an uncountable subset of X. Show that uncountably many points of A are limit points of A.

4.Show that every compact metrizable space X has a countable basis.{Hint: Let $\mathbf { \star } _ { n }$ be a finite covering of X by l/n-balls.]

5.(a) Show that every metrizable space with a countable dense subset has a countable basis.

(b） Show that every metrizable Lindelof space has a countable basis.

6. Show that $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell }$ and $I _ { o } ^ { 2 }$ are not metrizable.

7.Which of our four countability axioms does $s _ { \Omega }$ satisfy? What about $\bar { s } _ { \Omega { ? } }$

8.Which of our four countability axioms does ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { \omega }$ in the uniform topology satisfy?

9.Let A be a closed subspace of X. Show that if X is Lindelof,then A is Lindelof. Show by example that if X has a countable dense subset, A need not have a countable dense subset.

10. Show that if X is a countable product of spaces having countable dense subsets, then X has a countable dense subset.

11. Let $f : X \to Y$ be continuous.Show that if X is Lindelof,or if X has a countable dense subset,then f(X） satisfies the same condition.

12. Let $f : X \to Y$ be a continuous open map. Show that if X satisfies the first or the second countability axiom,then $f ( { \pmb X } )$ satisfies the same axiom.

13.Show that if X has a countable dense subset, every collection of disjoint open sets in X is countable.

14.Show that if X is Lindelof and Y is compact,then X × Y is Lindelof.

15. Give $\mathbb { R } ^ { \prime }$ the uniform metric,where $I = [ 0 , 1 ]$ Let $\mathcal { C } ( I , \mathbb { R } )$ be the subspace consisting of continuous functions. Show that $\mathcal { C } ( I , \mathbb { R } )$ has a countable dense subset, and therefore a countable basis. [Hint: Consider those continuous functions whose graphs consist of finitely many line segments with rational end points.]

16.(a） Show that the product space $\mathbb { R } ^ { \prime }$ ，where $I = \{ 0 , 1 \}$ ，has a countable dense subset.

(b)Show that if J has cardinality greater than $\mathcal { P } ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ ,then the product space $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ does not have a countable dense subset. [Hint: If D is dense in $\mathbb { R } ^ { j }$ ,define $f : J \to { \mathcal { P } } ( D )$ by the equation $f ( \alpha ) = D \cap \pi _ { \alpha } ^ { - 1 } ( ( a , b ) )$ ,where $( a , b )$ is a fixed interval in R.]

\*17. Give $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ the box topology. Let $\mathbb { Q } ^ { \infty }$ denote the subspace consisting of sequences of rationals that end in an infinite string of $\mathbf { 0 ^ { \bullet } s }$ Which of our four countability axioms does this space satisfy?

\*18.Let G be a first-countable topological group. Show that if G has a countable dense subset,or is Lindelof,then G has a countable basis.[Hint:Let $\{ B _ { n } \}$ be a countable basis at e If D is a countable dense subset of G,show the sets d $B _ { n }$ ， for $\pmb { d } \in \pmb { D }$ ,formabasis for G If G is Lindelof,choose for each n acountable set $C _ { n }$ such that the sets ${ \pmb { c } } { \pmb { B } } _ { \pmb { n } }$ ,for $c \in C _ { n }$ ,cover G. Show that as n ranges over $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ these sets form a basis for G.}

## \$31 The Separation Axioms

In this section, we introduce three separation axioms and explore some of their propertes. One you have already seen-the Hausdorff axiom. The others are similar but stronger. As always when we introduce new concepts,we shall examine the relationship between these axioms and the concepts introduced earlier in the book.

Recall thata space X is said to be Hausdorf if for each pair x,yof distinct points of X,there exist disjoint open sets containing x and y,respectively.

Definition.Suppose that one-point sets are closed in X. Then X is said to be regular if for each pair consisting of a point x and a closed set B disjoint frorn x,there exist disjoint open sets containing x and B,respectively. The space X is said to be normal if for each pair A,B of disjoint closed sets of X,there exist disjoint open sets containing Aand B,respectively.

It is clear that a regular space is Hausdorff,and that a normal space is regular. (We need to include the condition that one-point sets be closed as part of the definition of regularity and normality in order for this to be the case.A two-point space in the indiscrete topology satisfies the other part of the definitions of regularity and normality, even though it is not Hausdorff.）For examples showing the regularity axiorn stronger than the Hausdorff axiom.and normality stronger than regularity,see Examples l and 3.

These axioms are called separation axioms for the reason that they involve "separating" certain kinds of sets from one another by disjoint open sets.We have used the word “separation"before,of course,when we studied connected spaces.But in that case,we were trying to find disjoint open sets whose union was the entire space.

The present situation is quite different because the open sets need not satisfy this condition.

<!-- image-->  
The three separation axioms are illustrated in Figure 31.1.

There are other ways to formulate the separation axioms.One formulation that is sometimes useful is given in the following lemma:

Lemma 31.1． Let X be a topological space.Let one-point sets in X be closed.

(a) X is regular if and only if given a point x of X and a neighborhood U of x, there is aneighborhoodV of x such that ${ \bar { v } } \subset U$

(b) X is normal if and only if given a closed set A and an open set U containing A, there is an open set V containing A such that ${ \bar { v } } \subset U$

Proof.(a) Suppose that X is regular,and suppose that the point x and the neighborhood U of x are given.Let $\pmb { { \cal B } } = \pmb { { \cal X } } - \pmb { { \cal U } }$ ;thenB is a closed set.By hypothesis,there exist disjoint open sets Vand W containing x and B,respectively. The set Vis disjoint from B,since if $y \in B$ ,the set W is a neighborhood of y disjoint from V.Therefore, ${ \bar { v } } \subset U$ ,as desired.

To prove the converse,suppose the point x and the closed set B not containing x are given. Let $U = X - B$ .By hypothesis,there is a neighborhood V of x such that $\bar { v } \subset U$ .The open sets V and $\pmb { X } - \pmb { \bar { v } }$ are disjoint open sets containing x and B, respectively. Thus X is regular.

(b)This proof uses exactly the same argument; one just replaces the point x by the set A throughout.

Now we relate the separation axioms with the concepts previously introduced.

Theorem 31.2.(a) A subspace of a Hausdorff space is Hausdorff; a product of Hausdorff spaces is Hausdorff.

(b)A subspace of a regular space is regular; a product of regular spaces is regular.

Proof.(a) This result was an exercise in \$17.We provide a proof here.Let X be Hausdorff. Let x and y be two points of the subspace Y of X. If U and V are disjoint neighborhoods in X of x and y,respectively,then $\upsilon \cap \gamma$ and $v \cap Y$ are disjoint neighborhoods of x and y in Y.

Let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \}$ be a family of Hausdorff spaces.Let $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { \mathbf { \alpha } \mathbf { \alpha } } )$ and $\begin{array} { r } { { \bf y } = ( y _ { \pmb { \alpha } } ) } \end{array}$ be distinct points of the product space $\Pi X _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ .Because ${ \pmb x } \neq { \pmb y }$ ，there is some index $\pmb \beta$ such that $x _ { \beta } \neq y _ { \beta }$ .Choose disjoint open sets U and V in $\scriptstyle \pmb { X } _ { \pmb { \beta } }$ containing $x _ { \beta }$ and $y _ { \beta }$ ,res pectively. Then the sets $\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ and $\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ are disjoint open sets in $\prod X _ { \alpha }$ containing x and y, respectively.

(b) Let Y be a subspace of the regular space X. Then one-point sets are closed in Y.Let x be a point of Y and let B be a closed subset of Y disjoint from x. Now ${ \bar { B } } \cap Y = B$ ，where $\bar { \pmb B }$ denotes the closure of B in X．Therefore, $x \notin \hat { B }$ so,using regularity of X,we can choose disjoint open sets U and V of X containing x and $\bar { \pmb { B } }$ respectively. Then $U \cap Y$ and $v \cap r$ are disjoint open sets in Y containing x and B, respectively.

Let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \}$ be a family of regular spaces; let $\pmb { X } = \prod \pmb { X _ { \alpha } }$ .By (a),X is Hausdorff,so that one-point sets are closed in X. We use the preceding lemma to prove regularity of X. Let $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { \alpha } )$ be a point of X and let U be a neighborhood of x in X. Choose a basis element $\Pi U _ { { \pmb \alpha } }$ about x contained in U.Choose,for each α,a neighborhood $V _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ of $\pmb { x _ { \alpha } }$ in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ X such that $\bar { V } _ { \alpha } \subset U _ { \alpha }$ ；if it happens that $U _ { \alpha } = X _ { \alpha }$ , choose $V _ { \alpha } = X _ { \alpha }$ . Then $V = \prod V _ { \alpha }$ is a neighborhood of x in X.Since $\bar { \nu } = \Pi \bar { V } _ { \alpha }$ by Theorem 19.5,it follows at once that $\bar { V } \subset \bar { \Pi } U _ { \alpha } \subset U$ ,so that X is regular.

There is no analogous theorem for normal spaces,as we shall see shortly,in this section and the next.

EXAMPLEI The space $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ isHausdorffbut not regular.Recall that $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ denotes the reals in the topology having as basis all open intervals $( a , b )$ and all sets of the form $( a , b ) - K$ where $K = \lceil 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ .This space is Hausdorff,because any two distinct points have disjoint open intervals containing them.

But it is not regular. The set K is closed in $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ ,and it does not contain the point 0. Suppose that there exist disjoint open sets U and V containing O and K,respectively. Choose a basis element containing O and lying in U.It must be a basis element of the form $( a , b ) - K$ ,since each basis element of the form $( a , b )$ containing O intersects $\pmb { \cal { \kappa } }$ . Choose n large enough that $1 / n \in ( a , b )$ .Then choose a basis element about $1 / n$ contained in V; it must be a basis element of the form $( c , d )$ Finally,choose z so that $z \ < \ 1 / n$ and $z > \operatorname* { m a x } \{ c , 1 / ( n + 1 ) \}$ .Then z belongs to both U and V,so they are not disjoint. See Figure 31.2

<!-- image-->  
Figure 31.2

EXAMPLE 2.The space $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } _ { t }$ is normal It is immediate that one-point sets are closed in $\pmb { \mathrm { R } } _ { \pmb { \ell } }$ ,since the topology of $\scriptstyle { \mathbb { R } } _ { \ell }$ is finer than that of R.To check normality, Suppose that A and B are disjoint closed sets in $\scriptstyle \mathbb { R } _ { \ell }$ For each point a of A choose a basis element $[ a , x _ { u } )$ not intersectingB,and foreach pointb of B choose a basis element $[ b , x _ { b } )$ not intersecting A. The open sets

$$
U = \bigcup _ { a \in A } [ a , x _ { a } ) \mathrm { a n d } V = \bigcup _ { b \in B } [ b , x _ { b } )
$$

are disjoint open Sets about A and B,respectively.

## EXAMPLE 3The Sorgenfrey plane $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is not normal

The space $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ is regular (in fact, normal),so the product space $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is also regular. Thus this example serves two purposes.It shows that a regular space need not be normal,and it shows that the product of two normal spaces need not be normal

We suppose $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is normal and derve a contradiction Let L be the subspace of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ consisting of all points of the form ${ \pmb x } \ { \pmb x } \left( - { \pmb x } \right)$ Then L is closed in $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ 、and L has the discrete topology.Hence every subset A of L,being closed in $L ,$ is closed in $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ Because $L - A$ is also closed in $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ this nteans that for every nonempty proper subset $\pmb { A }$ of L,one can find disjoint open sets $\pmb { U } _ { \pmb { A } }$ and $\nu _ { A }$ containing A and $L - A$ ,respectively

Let $\pmb { D }$ denote the set of points of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ having rational coordinates; it is dense in $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ We define a mapθ that assigns,to each subset of the line L,a subset of the set $\smash { \pmb { D } } ,$ by seting

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } & { \theta ( A ) = D \cap U _ { A } \quad \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } \alpha \subsetneq A \subsetneq L , } & \\ & { \theta ( \alpha ) = \varnothing , } \\ & { \theta ( L ) = D . } \end{array}
$$

We show that $\theta \cdot \mathcal { P } ( L )  \mathcal { P } ( D )$ is injective.

Let A be a proper nonempty_subset of L. Then $\theta ( A ) = D \cap U _ { A }$ is neither empty (since $U _ { A }$ is open and $_ D$ is dense in $\bar { \mathbb { R } } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 } )$ nor all of D (since $D \cap V _ { A }$ is nonempty). It remains to show that if B is another proper nonempty subset of L,then $\theta ( A ) \neq \theta ( B )$

One of the sets A,B contains a point not in the other; suppose that ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb A }$ and $x \notin B$ Then $x \in L - B$ so that $x \in U _ { A } \cap V _ { B } ;$ since the latter set is open and nonempty,it must contain points of D These points belong to $U _ { A }$ and not to $U _ { B }$ ,therefore, $D \cap U _ { A } \neq D \cap U _ { B }$ as desired.Thusθ is injective

Now we show there exists an injective map $\phi : \mathcal { P } ( D )  L$ .Because D is countably infinite and $\pmb { L }$ has the cardinality of R,it suffces to define an injective map ψ of $\mathcal { P } ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ into R.For that, we let ψ assign to the subset S of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ the infinite decimal $. a _ { 1 } a _ { 2 } \ldots$ where $\mathbf { \Delta } \mathbf { \mathfrak { a } } _ { \iota } = 0 \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } \mathfrak { i } \in S$ and $\mathbf { a } _ { t } = 1$ ifiS.That is,

$$
\psi ( S ) = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { \infty } a _ { i } / 1 0 ^ { t }
$$

Now the composite

$$
\mathcal { P } ( L ) \xrightarrow { \theta } \mathcal { P } ( D ) \xrightarrow { \psi } L
$$

is an injective map of $\mathcal { P } ( L )$ into L.But Theorem 7.8 tells us such a map does not exist! Thus we have reached a contradiction

This proof that $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is not normal is in some ways not very satisfying. We showed oniy that there must exist some proper nonempty subset A of L such that the sets A and $B = L - A$ are not contained in disjoint open sets of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 } .$ But we did not actually find such a set A.In fact,the set A of points of L having rational coordinates is such a set,but the proof is not easy. It is left to the exercises.

## Exercises

1. Show that if X is regular,every pair of points of X have neighborhoods whose closures are disjoint.

2.Show that if X is normal,every pair of disjoint closed sets have neighborhoods whose closures are disjoint.

3. Show that every order topology is regular.

4. Let X and $\pmb { X } ^ { \prime }$ denote a single set under two topologies $\mathcal { T }$ and $\scriptstyle { \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ ,respectively: assume that $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime } \supset \mathcal { T }$ . If one of the spaces is Hausdorff (or regular,or normal), what does that imply about the other?

5.Let $f , g : X \to Y$ be continuous; assume that Y is Hausdorff. Show that {x| $f ( x ) = g ( x ) \}$ is closed in X.

6. Let $p : X \to Y$ be a closed continuous surjective map. Show that if X is normal, then so is Y.[Hint: If U is an open set containing $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ \mathbf { y } \} )$ ,show there is a neighborhood W ofy such that $p ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { W } ) \subset \ d U . ]$

7. Let $p : X \to Y$ be a closed continuous surjective map such that $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} )$ is compact for each $y \in Y$ .(Such a map is called a perfect map.)

(a） Show that if X is Hausdorff,then so is Y.

(b） Show that if X is regular, then so is Y.

(c） Show that if X is locally compact,then so is Y.

(d) Show that if X is second-countable,then so is Y.[Hint: Let B be a countable basis for X.For each finite subset Jof B,let $U _ { J }$ be the union of all sets of the form $p ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { W } )$ ,for W open in Y,that are contained in the union of the elements of J.]

8.Let X be a space; let G be a topological group. An action of G on X is a continuous map α : $G \times X \to X$ such that, denoting $\pmb { \alpha } ( \pmb { g } \times \pmb { x } )$ by ${ \pmb g } \cdot { \pmb x }$ ,one has: (i) $e \cdot x = x$ for all ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$

(ii) $g _ { 1 } \cdot ( g _ { 2 } \cdot x ) = ( g _ { 1 } \cdot g _ { 2 } ) \cdot x$ for all $x \in X$ and $g _ { 1 } , g _ { 2 } \in G$

Define $x \sim g \cdot x$ for all x and g; the resulting quotient space is denoted $\scriptstyle { X / G }$ and called the orbit space of the action α.

Theorem. Let G be a compact topological group; let X be a topological space; let α be an action of G on X.If X is Hausdorff,or regular,or normal,or locally compact, or second-countable,so is $X / G$

[Hint: See Exercise 13 of \$26.]

\*9.Let A be the set of all points of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ of the form $x \times ( - x )$ 、for x rational; let B be the set of all points of this form for x irrational. If V is an open set of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ containing B,show there exists no open set U containing A that is disjoint from V, as follows:

(a)Let $\pmb { K _ { n } }$ consist of all irrational numbers x in [O,l] such that $[ x , x + 1 / n ) \times$ $[ - x , - x + 1 / n )$ is contained in V. Show [O,1] is the union of the sets $K _ { n }$ and countably many one-point sets.

(b) Use Exercise 5 of &27 to show that some set ${ \bar { K } } _ { n }$ contains an open interval (a,b) of R.

(c） Show that V contains the open parallelogram consisting of all points of the form $x \times ( - x + \epsilon )$ for which $a < x < b$ and $0 < \epsilon < 1 / n$

(d)Conclude that if q is a rational number with $a < q < b$ ，then the point $q \times ( - q )$ of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$ is a limit point of V.

## \$32 Normal Spaces

Now we turn to a more thorough study of spaces satisfying the normality axiom. In one sense,the term “normal"is something of a misnomer, for normal spaces are not as well-behaved as one might wish. On the other hand, most of the spaces with which we are familiar do satisfy this axiom,as we shall see.Its importance comes from the fact that the results one can prove under the hypothesis of normality are central to much of topology. The Urysohn metrization theorem and the Tietze extension theorem are two such results;we shall deal with them later in this chapter.

We begin by proving three theorems that give three important sets of hypotheses under which normality of a space is assured.

## Theorem 32.1. Every regular space with a countable basis is normal.

Proof.Let X be a regular space with a countable basis B.Let A and B be disjoint closed subsets of X. Each point x of A has aneighborhood U not intersecting B. Using regularity,choose a neighborhood V of x whose closure lies in U;finally,choose an element of B containing x and contained in V.By choosing such a basis element for each x in A,we construct a countable covering of A by open sets whose closures do not intersect B.Since this covering of A is countable,we can index it with the positive integers; let us denote it by $\{ U _ { n } \}$

Similarly,choose a countable collection $\{ V _ { n } \}$ of open sets covering B,such that each set $\bar { V } _ { n }$ is disjoint from A.The sets $U = \bigcup U _ { n }$ and $V = \bigcup V _ { n }$ are open sets containing A and B,respectively,but they need not be disjoint. We perform the following simple trick to construct two open sets that are disjoint. Given n,define

$$
U _ { n } ^ { \prime } = U _ { n } - \bigcup _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } { \bar { V } } _ { i } \qquad { \mathrm { a n d } } \quad V _ { n } ^ { \prime } = V _ { n } - \bigcup _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } { \bar { U } } _ { i } .
$$

Note that each set $U _ { n } ^ { \prime }$ is open,being the difference of an open set $U _ { n }$ and a closed set $\textstyle \bigcup _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } { \bar { V } } _ { i }$ .Simularly,each set $V _ { \pmb { \eta } } ^ { \prime }$ is open. The collection $\{ U _ { n } ^ { \prime } \}$ covers A,because each x in A belongs to $U _ { n }$ for some n,and x belongs to none of the sets $\bar { V } _ { \iota }$ . Similarly, the collection $\{ V _ { n } ^ { \prime } \}$ covers B. See Figure 32.1.

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Figure 32.1

Finally, the open sets

$$
U ^ { \prime } = \bigcup _ { n \in { \bf Z } _ { + } } U _ { n } ^ { \prime } \mathrm { a n d } V ^ { \prime } = \bigcup _ { n \in { \bf Z } _ { + } } V _ { n } ^ { \prime }
$$

are disjoint.For if $x \in U ^ { \prime } \cap V ^ { \prime }$ ,then $x \in U _ { \prime } ^ { \prime } \cap V _ { k } ^ { \prime }$ for some $j$ and k． Suppose that $j \le k$ 、It follows from the definition of $U _ { J } ^ { \prime }$ that $x \in U _ { J }$ ; and since $j \le k$ it follows from the definition of $V _ { \pmb { k } } ^ { \prime }$ that $x \notin \bar { U } _ { j }$ .Asimular contradiction arises if $j \geq k$

## Theorem 32.2. Every metrizable space is normal.

Proof.Let X bea metrizable space with metric d.Let A and B be disjoint closed subsets of X.For each $a \in A$ choose $\epsilon _ { a }$ so that the ball $B ( a , \epsilon _ { a } )$ does not intersect B. Similarly,for each b in B,choose $\epsilon _ { b }$ so that the ball $B ( b , \epsilon _ { b } )$ does not intersect A. Define

$$
U = \bigcup _ { a \in A } B ( a , \epsilon _ { a } / 2 ) \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } V = \bigcup _ { b \in B } B ( b , \epsilon _ { b } / 2 ) .
$$

Then U and V are open sets containing A and B,respectively; we assert they are disjoint. For if $z \in U \cap V$ then

$$
z \in B ( a , \epsilon _ { a } / 2 ) \cap B ( b , \epsilon _ { b } / 2 )
$$

for some $a \in \ A$ and some $\textbf { \textit { b } } \in \textbf { \textit { B } }$ The triangle inequality applies to show that $d ( a , b ) ~ < ~ ( \epsilon _ { a } + \epsilon _ { b } ) / 2$ If $\epsilon _ { a } \ \leq \ \epsilon _ { b }$ ，thend $( a , b ) \ < \ \epsilon _ { b } .$ ，so that the ball $B ( b , \epsilon _ { b } )$ contains the point a.If $\epsilon _ { b } \leq \epsilon _ { a }$ ,then $d ( a , b ) < \epsilon _ { a }$ ,so that the ball $B ( a , \epsilon _ { a } )$ contains the point b.Neither situation is possible.

## Theorem 32.3.Every compact Hausdorff space is normal.

Proof.Let X be a compact Hausdorff space.We have already essentially proved that X is regular. For if x is a point of X and B is a closed set in X not containing x, then B is compact,so that Lemma 26.4 applies to show there exist disjoint open sets about x and B,respectively.

Essentially the same argument as given in that lemma can be used to show that X is normal: Given disjoint closed sets A and B in X,choose,for each point a of A, disjoint open sets $U _ { a }$ and $V _ { a }$ containing a and B,respectively. (Here we use regularity of X.）The collection $\{ U _ { a } \}$ covers A;because A is compact,A may be covered by finitely many sets $U _ { a _ { 1 } } , \dots , U _ { a _ { m } }$ . Then

$$
U = U _ { a _ { 1 } } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup U _ { a _ { m } } \mathrm { a n d } V = V _ { a _ { 1 } } \cap \cdot \cdot \cdot \cap V _ { a _ { m } }
$$

are disjoint open sets containing A and B,respectively.

Here is a further result about normalty that we shall find useful in dealing with some examples.

## Theorem 32.4.Every wel-ordered set X is normal in the order topology.

It is,in fact,true that every order topology is normal (see Example 39 of [S-S]); but we shall not have occasion to use this stronger result.

Proof.Let X be a well-ordered set.We assert that every interval of the form (x,yl is open in X.If X has a largest element and y is that element,(x,yl is just a basis element about y. If y is not the largest element of X,then (x,y} equals the open set $( { \pmb x } , { \pmb y } ^ { \prime } )$ ,where $\mathbf { y } ^ { \prime }$ is the immediate successor of y.

Now let A and B be disjoint closed sets in $\pmb { \chi }$ ,assume for the moment that neither A nor B contains the smallest element ${ \pmb a } _ { 0 }$ of $\pmb { \chi }$ For each $a \in A$ ,there existsa basis element about $\pmb { a }$ disjoint from $\pmb { B } ;$ it contains some interval of the form $( x , a )$ (Here is where we use the fact that a is not the smallest element of $\pmb { X . } )$ Choose,for each $a \in A$ ，such an interval $( x _ { a } , a ]$ disjoint from B.Similarly,for each $\boldsymbol { b } \in \boldsymbol { B }$ ,choose an interval $( y _ { b } , b )$ disjoint from A. The sets

$$
U = \bigcup _ { a \in A } ( x _ { a } , a ] \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad V = \bigcup _ { b \in B } ( y _ { b } , b ]
$$

are open sets containing A and B,respectively; we assert they are disjoint. For suppose that $z \in U \cap V$ . Then $z \in ( x _ { a } , a ] \cap ( y _ { b } , b ]$ for some $a \in A$ and some $\pmb { b } \in \pmb { B }$ . Assume that $a < b$ Then if $a \leq y _ { b }$ ,the two intervals are disjoint,while if $a \mathrm { ~ > ~ } y _ { b }$ ,we have $a \in ( y _ { b } , b ]$ .contrarytothe factthat $( y _ { b } , b ]$ is disjoint from A.A similar contradiction occurs if $b < a$

Finally,assume that A and B are disjoint closed sets in X,and A contains the smallest element ${ \pmb a } _ { 0 }$ of X. The set $\left\{ a _ { 0 } \right\}$ is both open and closed in X.By the result of the preceding paragraph,there exist disjoint open sets $\pmb { U }$ and V containing the closed sets $A - \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ and $B ,$ respectively.Then $U \cup \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ and V are disjoint open sets Containing A and B,respectively

EXAMPLE1．IfJis uncountable,the product space $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ is not normal.The proof is fairly difficult; we leave it as a challenging exercise (see Exercise 9).

This example serves three purposesIt shows that a regular space $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ need not be normal. It shows that a subspace of a normal space need not be normal, for $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ is homeomorphic to the subspace $( 0 , 1 ) ^ { J }$ of $[ 0 , 1 \} ^ { J }$ ，which (assuming the Tychonoff theorem）is compact Hausdorff and therefore normalAnd it shows that an uncountable product of normal spaces need not be normal. It leaves unsettled the question as to whether a finite or a countable product of normal spaces mught be normal.

EXAMPLE 2. The producl space $S _ { \Omega } \times \bar { S } _ { \Omega }$ is not normal.t

Consider the well-ordered set $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ ,in the order topology,and consider the subset ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb \Omega } .$ in the subspace topology (which is the same as the order topology).Both spaces are normal, by Theorem 32.4.We shall show that the product space $S _ { \Omega } \times \bar { S } _ { \Omega }$ is not normal.

This example serves three purposes. First, it shows that a regular space need not be normal, for $s _ { \Omega } \times \bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ is a product of regular spaces and therefore regular. Second,it shows that a subspace of a normal space need not be normal, for $s _ { \Omega } \times \bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ is a subspace of $\bar { s } _ { \Omega } \times \bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ which is a compact Hausdorf space and therefore normal Third,it shows that the product of two normal spaces need not be normal.

First,we consider the space $\bar { s } _ { \Omega } \times \bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ 、andits“diagonal" $\Delta \ = \ \{ x \times x \mid x \in { \bar { S } } \Omega \}$ Because $\bar { s } _ { \mathfrak { a } }$ is Hausdorff, $\pmb { \Delta }$ is closed in $\bar { s } _ { \Omega } \times \bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ If $\boldsymbol { \imath }$ and Vare disjoint neighborhoods of x and y,respectively,then $U \times V$ is a neighborhood of $\pmb { x } \times \pmb { y }$ that does not intersect $\pmb { \Delta }$

Therefore,in the subspace $s _ { \mathfrak { a } } \times \bar { s } _ { \mathfrak { a } }$ , the set

$$
A = \Delta \cap ( S _ { \Omega } \times { \bar { S } } _ { \Omega } ) = \Delta - \{ \Omega \times \Omega \}
$$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 32.2

is closed. Likewise,the set

$$
B = S _ { \Omega } \times \left\{ \Omega \right\}
$$

is closed in $s _ { \Omega } \times \bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ ,beinga "slice"of this product space.The sets Aand Bare disjoint. We shall assume there exist disjoint open sets U and V of $S _ { \Omega } \times \bar { S } _ { \Omega }$ containing A and B, respectively,and derive a contradiction. See Figure_32.2.

Given ${ \pmb x } \in \pmb S \mathbf { \Omega }$ ,consider the vertical slice ${ \pmb x } \times \bar { \pmb S } _ { \Omega }$ .We assert that there is some point $\pmb { \beta }$ with $x < \beta < \Omega$ such that $x \times \beta$ lies outside U For if U contained all points $x \times \beta$ for $x < \beta < \Omega$ ,then the top point $\pmb { x } \times \pmb { \Omega }$ of the slice would be a limut point of $\pmb { U }$ ,which it is not because Vis an open set disjoint from U containing this top point

Choose $\pmb { \beta } ( \pmb { x } )$ to be such a point; just to be definite,let $\pmb { \beta } ( \pmb { x } )$ be the smallesl element of $s _ { \Omega }$ such that $x < \beta ( x ) < \Omega$ and ${ \pmb x } \ { \pmb x } \beta ( { \pmb x } )$ lies outside U. Define a sequence of points of $s _ { \Omega }$ as follows: Let $\pmb { x } _ { 1 }$ be any point of $s _ { \Omega }$ $\operatorname { L e t } x _ { 2 } = \beta ( x _ { 1 } )$ ,and in general, ${ \pmb x } _ { n + 1 } = { \pmb \beta } ( { \pmb x } _ { n } )$ We have

$$
x _ { 1 } < x _ { 2 } < \ldots
$$

because $\beta ( x ) > x$ for all x.The set $\{ x _ { n } \}$ is countable and therefore has an upper bound in ${ \cal { S } } _ { \Omega } ;$ let $b \in S _ { \Omega }$ be its least upper bound. Because the sequence is increasing,it must converge to its least upper bound;thus $x _ { n } \to b$ But $\beta ( x _ { n } ) = x _ { n + 1 }$ ,so that $\beta ( x _ { n } )  b$ also.Then

$$
x _ { n } \times \beta ( x _ { n } ) \longrightarrow b \times b
$$

in the product space. See Figure 32.3.Now we have a contradiction,for the point $\ b \times b$ lies in the set $\pmb { A }$ ，which is contained in the open set $\boldsymbol { { U } } ;$ and U contains none of the points ${ \pmb x } _ { n } \ \times \ { \pmb \beta } ( { \pmb x } _ { n } )$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 32.3

## Exercises

1. Show that a closed subspace of a normal space is normal.

2. Show that if $\Pi X _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is Hausdorff,or regular,or normal,then so is $X _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ . (Assume that each $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is nonempty.)

3.Show that every locally compact Hausdorff space is regular.

4. Show that every regular Lindelof space is normal.

5. Is $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ normal in the product topology? In the uniform topology?

It is not known whether $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is normal in the box topology.Mary-Ellen Rudin has shown that the answer is affirmative if one assumes the continuum hypothesis [RM]. In fact,she shows it satisfies a stronger condition called paracompactness.

6.A space X is said to be completely normal if every subspace of X is normal. Show that Xis completely normal if and only if for every pair A,B of separated sets in X (that is,sets such that $\bar { A } \cap B = \emptyset$ and $A \cap { \bar { B } } = \emptyset$ ，there exist disjoint open sets containing them. [Hint: If X is completely normal, consider $\pmb { X } - ( \bar { \pmb { A } } \cap \bar { \pmb { B } } )$

7.Which of the following spaces are completely normal? Justify your answers.

(a)A subspace of a completely normal space.

(b）The product of two completely normal spaces.

(c）A well-ordered set in the order topology.

(d) A metrizable space.

(e）A compact Hausdorff space.

(f) A regular space with a countable basis.

(g） The space $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell }$

\*8. Prove the following:

Theorem．Every linear continuum X is normal.

(a)Let C be a nonempty closed subset of X.If U is a component of $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { C }$ show that U is a set of the form $( c , c ^ { \prime } )$ or $( c , \infty )$ or $( - \infty , c )$ , where c, $c ^ { \prime } \in C$

(b) Let A and B be closed disjoint subsets of X． For each component W of $X - A \cup B$ that is an open interval with one end point in A and the other in B,choose a point $c w$ of W. Show that the set C of the points $c w$ is closed.

(c） Show that if V is a component of $\pmb { X } - \pmb { C }$ ，then V does not intersect both A and B.

## \*9. Prove the following:

Theorem.If Jis uncountable,then $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ is not normal.

Proof.(This proof is due to A.H. Stone,as adapted in [S-S].) Let $\pmb { X } = ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { J }$ it will suffice to show that X is not normal,since X is a closed subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ .We use functional notation for the elements of X,so that the typical element of X is a function $\mathbf { x } : J \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

（a）If $\pmb { x } \in \pmb { X }$ and if B isa finite subset of J,let $U ( \mathbf { x } , \pmb { \cal { B } } )$ denote the set consisting of all those elements y of X such that ${ \bf y } ( { \pmb { \alpha } } ) = { \bf x } ( { \pmb { \alpha } } )$ for ${ \pmb { \alpha } } \in { \pmb { B } }$ .Show the sets $U ( \mathbf { x } , \pmb { \cal { B } } )$ are a basis for X.

(b）Define $P _ { \pi }$ to be the subset of X consisting of those X such that on the set $J - \mathbf { x } ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { n } )$ ，the map x is injective. Show that ${ \pmb P } _ { \bf l }$ and $\pmb { P } _ { 2 }$ are closed and disjoint.

(c） Suppose U and V are open sets containing $P _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb P } _ { 2 }$ ,respectively. Given a sequence $\alpha _ { 1 } , \alpha _ { 2 } , \ldots$ of distinct elements of J,and a sequence

$$
0 = n _ { 0 } < n _ { 1 } < n _ { 2 } < \cdot \cdot
$$

of integers, for each $i \geq 1$ let us set

$$
B _ { i } = \{ \alpha _ { 1 } , \cdots , \alpha _ { n _ { t } } \}
$$

and define $\mathbf { x } _ { i } \in X$ by the equations

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \mathbf { x } _ { i } ( \alpha _ { j } ) = j } & { \mathrm { f o r ~ } 1 \le j \le n _ { i - 1 } , } \\ { \mathbf { x } _ { i } ( \alpha ) = 1 } & { \mathrm { f o r ~ a l l ~ o t h e r ~ v a l u e s ~ o f ~ } \alpha . } \end{array}
$$

Show that one can choose the sequences $\alpha _ { j }$ and $\pmb { n } _ { j }$ so that for each i,one has the inclusion

$$
U ( \mathbf { x } _ { i } , B _ { i } ) \subset U .
$$

[Hint:To begin,note that ${ \bf x } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb { \alpha } } ) ~ = ~ 1$ for all α; now choose $\pmb { B } _ { 1 }$ so that $U ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 } , B _ { 1 } ) \subset U . 1$

(d) Let A be the set $\{ \alpha _ { 1 } , \alpha _ { 2 } , \dots \ \}$ constructed in (c） Define ${ \bf y } \cdot { \pmb J }  { \pmb { \mathbb { Z } } } _ { + }$ by the equations

$$
\mathsf { y } ( \alpha _ { j } ) = j \qquad \mathsf { f o r } \alpha _ { j } \in A ,
$$

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathsf { y } ( \alpha ) = 2 \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } a \mathsf { l l ~ o t h e r ~ v a l u e s ~ o f ~ } \alpha . } \end{array}
$$

Choose B so that $U ( \mathbf { y } , B ) \subset V$ . Then choose i so that B  A is contained in the set $\pmb { B _ { i } }$ . Show that

$$
U ( \mathbf { x } _ { i + 1 } , B _ { i + 1 } ) \cap U ( \mathbf { y } , B )
$$

is not empty.

10. Is every topological group normal?

## \$33 The Urysohn Lemma

Now we come to the first deep theorem of the book,a theorem that is commonly called the “Urysohn lemma." It asserts the existence of certain real-valued continuous functions on a normal space X.It is the crucial tool used in proving a number of important theorems.We shall prove three of them-the Urysohn metrization theorem, the Tietze extension theorem,and an imbedding theorem for manifolds-in succeeding sections of this chapter.

Why do we callthe Urysohn lemma a “deep" theorem? Because its proof involves a really original idea,which the previous proofs did not.Perhaps we can explain what we mean this way:By and large,one would expect that if one went through this book and deleted all the proofs we have given up to now and then handed the book to a bright student who had not studied topology,that student ought to be able to go through the book and work out the proofs independently. (It would take a good deal of time and effort, of course;and one would not expect the student to handle the trickier examples.）But the Urysohn lemma is on a different level. It would take considerably more originalty than most of us possess to prove this lemma unless we were given copious hints'

Theorem 33.1 (Urysohn Iemma).Let X bea normal space,let Aand B be disjoint closed subsets of X.Let [a,b] bea closed interval in the real line.Then there exists a continuous map

$$
f : X \longrightarrow [ a , b ]
$$

such that $\textstyle f ( x ) = a$ for every x in A,and $f ( x ) = b$ for every x in B.

Proof.We need consider only the case where the interval in question is the interval [0,1];the general case follows from that one. The first step of the proof is to construct,using normality, a certain family $U _ { p }$ of open sets of X,indexed by the rational numbers.Then one uses these sets to define the continuous function $f$

Step l.Let P be the set of all rational numbers in the interval $\{ 0 , 1 \} ^ { \dag }$ We shall define,for each p in $\boldsymbol { P } ,$ an open set $U _ { p }$ of X, in such a way that whenever $p < q$ ，we have

$$
\bar { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { q }
$$

Thus, the sets $U _ { p }$ will be simply ordered by inclusion in the same way their subscripts are ordered by the usual ordering in the real line.

Because $P$ is countable,we can use induction to define the sets $U _ { p }$ (or rather, the principle of recursive definition). Arrange the elements of $\pmb { P }$ in an infinite sequence in some way; for convenience,let us suppose that the numbers l and O are the first two elements of the sequence.

Now define the sets $U _ { p }$ ,as follows. First,define $U _ { 1 } = X - B$ .Second,because A is a closed set contained in the open set $U _ { 1 }$ , we may by normality of X choose an open set $U _ { 0 }$ such that

$$
A \subset U _ { 0 } \quad \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } \quad \bar { U } _ { 0 } \subset U _ { 1 }
$$

In general, let $P _ { n }$ denote the set consisting of the first n rational numbers in the sequence. Suppose that $U _ { p }$ is defined for all rational numbers p belonging to the set $P _ { n }$ ,satisfying the condition

$$
\begin{array} { r } { p < q \Longrightarrow \bar { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { q } . } \end{array}\tag{*}
$$

Let r denote the next rational number in the sequence; we wish to define $U _ { r }$

Consider the set $P _ { n + 1 } = P _ { n } \cup \{ r \}$ .It is a finite subset of the interval [O,1],and,as such, it has a simple ordering derived from the usual order relation < on the real line. In a finite simply ordered set,every element (other than the smallest and the largest) has an immediate predecessor and an immediate successor. (See Theorem l0.1）The number O is the smallest element,and l is the largest element,of the simply ordered set $P _ { n + 1 }$ ,and r is neither O nor l So r has an immediate predecessor p in $P _ { n + 1 }$ and an immediate successor $\pmb q$ in $P _ { n + 1 }$ The sets $U _ { p }$ and $U _ { q }$ are already defined,and $\bar { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { q }$ by the induction hypothesis.Using normality of $\pmb { \chi }$ ,we can find an open set $\scriptstyle { U _ { r } }$ of X such that

$$
\bar { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { r } \mathrm { a n d } \bar { U } _ { r } \subset U _ { q } .
$$

We assert that (\*) now holds for every pair of elements of $P _ { n + 1 }$ . If both elements lie in $P _ { n } , ( * )$ holds by the induction hypothesis. If one of them is r and the other is a point s of $\boldsymbol { P } _ { n }$ ,then either $s \leq p$ ,in which case

$$
\bar { U } _ { s } \subset \bar { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { r } ,
$$

or ${ \pmb { s } } \geq { \pmb q }$ , in which case

$$
\bar { U } _ { r } \subset U _ { q } \subset U _ { s } .
$$