We know that a sequence $( f _ { n } )$ of continuous functions that converges in the uniform topology has a continuous limit, and the preceding example shows_that a sequence that converges only in the topology of pointwise convergence need not. One can ask whether there is a topology intermediate between these two that will suffice to ensure that the limut of a convergent sequence of continuous functions is continuous.The answer is “yes",assuming the (fairly muld) restriction that the space X be compactly generated, it will suffice if $f _ { n }$ converges to $\pmb { f }$ in the topology of compact convergence,which we now define.

Definition. Let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space; let X be a topological space.Given an element $\pmb { f }$ of $\gamma ^ { X }$ ,a compact subspace C_of X,and a number $\epsilon > 0 ,$ let $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ denote the set of all those elements g of $\gamma ^ { X }$ for which

$$
\operatorname* { s u p } \{ d ( f ( x ) , g ( x ) ) \mid x \in C \} < \epsilon .
$$

The sets $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ form a basis for a topology on $\pmb { Y } ^ { \pmb { X } }$ .It is called the topology of compact convergence (or sometimes the “topology of uniform convergence orl compact sets").

It is easy to show that the sets $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ satisfy the conditions for a basis. The crucial step is to note that if $g \in B _ { C } ( f , \epsilon )$ ,then for

$$
\delta = \epsilon - \operatorname* { s u p } \{ d ( f ( x ) , g ( x ) ) \mid x \in C \} ,
$$

we have $B _ { C } ( g , \delta ) \subset B _ { C } ( f , \epsilon )$

The topology of compact convergence differs from the topology of point wise convergence in that the general basis element containing f consists of functions that are "close"to fnot just at finitely many points,but at all points of some compact set.

The justification forthe choice of terminology comes from the following theorem, whose proof is immediate.

Theorem 46.2. A sequence $f _ { n } \quad X \to Y$ of functions converges to the function f in the topology of compact convergence if and only if for each compact subspace C of X, the sequence $f _ { n } | C$ converges uniformly to f|C.

Definition.A space X is said to be compactly generated if it satisfies the following condition: A set A is open in X if $\mathbf { \Omega } _ { A \cap C }$ is open in C for each compact subspace C of x.

This condition is equivalent to requiring that a set B be closed in X if $\pmb { { \cal B } } \cap \pmb { C }$ is closed in C for each compact C.It is a fairly mild restriction on the space; many familiar spaces are compactly generated. For instance:

Lemma 46.3.If X is locally conpact,or if X satisfies the first countability axiom, thenX iscompactlygenerated.

Proof.Suppose that X is locally compact. Let $\pmb { A } \cap \pmb { C }$ be open in C for every compact subspace C of X.We show A is open in X.Given $x \in A$ ,choose a neighborhood U of x that lies in a compact subspace C of X. Since $\pmb { A } \cap \pmb { C }$ is open in C by hypothesis, $A \cap U$ 1s open in $\boldsymbol { U }$ ,and hence open in X.Then $\pmb { A } \cap \pmb { U }$ is a neighborhood of x contained in A,so that A is open in X.

Suppose that X satisfies the first countability axiom. If $\pmb { { \cal B } } \cap \pmb { C }$ is closed in C for each compact subspace C of X,we show that B is closed in X.Let x be a point of $\bar { \pmb B }$ we show that $\pmb { x } \in \pmb { B }$ ，Since X has acountable basis at x,there is a sequence $( x _ { n } )$ of points of B converging to x. The subspace

$$
C = \{ x \} \cup \{ x _ { n } \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}
$$

is compact, so that $B \cap C$ is by assumption closed in C. Since $\pmb { { \cal B } } \cap \pmb { C }$ contains $x _ { n }$ for everyn, it contains x aswell.Therefore, ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb B }$ ,as desired.

The crucial fact about compactly generated spaces is the following:

Lemma 46.4. If X is compactly generated, then a function $f : X \to Y$ is continuous if for each compact subspace C of X,the restricted function $f \vert C$ is continuous.

Proof.Let V be an open subset of Y; we show that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in X. Given any subspace C of X,

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) \cap C = ( f | C ) ^ { - 1 } ( V ) .
$$

If C is compact, this set is open in C because $f | C$ is continuous. Since X is compactly generated,it follows that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in X.

Theorem 46.5. Let X be acompactly generated space: let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space.   
Then ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ is closed in $\gamma ^ { x }$ in the topology of compact convergence.

Proof. Let $f \in Y ^ { X }$ be a limit point of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ； we wish to show f is continuous. It suffices to show that $_ { f | C }$ is continuous for each compact subspace C of X．For each n,consider the neighborhood $B _ { C } ( f , 1 / n )$ of $f ;$ it intersects ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ,so we can choose a function $f _ { n } \in { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ lying in this neighborhood. The sequence of functions $f _ { n } | C : C \to Y$ converges uniformly to the function $f \vert C$ ,so that by the uniform limut theorem, $f | C$ is continuous.

Corollary 46.6. Let X be a compactly generated space; let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space. If a sequence of continuous functions $f _ { n } \cdot X \to Y$ converges to f in the topology of compact convergence,then f is continuous.

Now we have three topologies for the function space $\gamma ^ { X }$ when Y is metrc. The relation between them is stated in the following theorem,whose proof is straightforward.

Theorem 46.7. Let X be a space; let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space. For the function space $\gamma ^ { X }$ ,one has the following inclusions of topologies:

$$
( u n i f \mathsf { o r m } ) \supset ( c \mathsf { o m p a c t } \mathsf { c o n v e r g e n c e } ) \supset ( p \mathsf { o i n t w i s e } \mathsf { c o n v e r g e n c e } ) .
$$

If X is compact,the first two coincide,and if X is discrete,the second two coincide.

Now the definitions of the uniform topology and the compact convergence topology made specific use of the metric d for the space Y. But the topology of pointwise convergence did not; in fact,it is defined for any space Y.It is natural to as k whether either of these other topologies can be extended to the case where Y is an arbitrary topological space.There is no satisfactory answer to this question for the space $\gamma ^ { \bar { x } }$ of all functions mapping X into Y. But for the subspace ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ of continuous functions,one can prove something. It turns out that there is in general a topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ,called the compact-open topology,that coincides with the compact convergence topology when Y is a metric space. This topology is important in its own right, as we shall see.

Definition.Let X and Y be topological spaces. If C is a compact subspace of X and U is an open subset of Y,define

$$
S ( C , U ) = \{ f \mid f \in { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y ) { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } f ( C ) \subset U \} .
$$

The sets ${ \cal { S } } ( C , U )$ form asubbasis for a topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ that is called the compactopen topology.

It is clear from the definition that the compact-open topology is finer than the pointwise convergence topology. The compact-open topology can in fact be defined on the entire function space $\gamma ^ { X }$ ．It is,however,of interest only for the subspace ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ,so we shall consider it only for that space.

Theorem 46.8. Let X be a space and let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space. On the set ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ the compact-open topology and the topology of compact convergence coincide.

Proof.If A is a subset of Y and $\epsilon > 0 .$ let $U ( A , \epsilon )$ be the e-neighborhood of A. If A is compact and V is an open set containing A,then there is an $\epsilon > 0$ such that $U ( A , \epsilon ) \subset V$ .Indeed,the minimum value of the function $d ( a , X - V )$ is the required e.

We first prove that the topology of compact convergence is finer than the compactopen topology Let $s ( C , U )$ be a subbasis element for the compact-open topology, and let f be an element of $s ( C , U )$ . Because f is continuous, $f ( C )$ is a compact subset of the open set $\boldsymbol { U }$ .Therefore,we can choose ε so that ε-neighborhood of $f ( C )$ lies in $\pmb { U }$ .Then,as desired,

$$
B _ { C } ( f , \epsilon ) \subset S ( C , U ) .
$$

Now we prove that the compact-open topology is finer than the topology of compact convergence.Let $f \in { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ .Given an open set about f in the topology of compact convergence, it contains a basis element of the form $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ . We shall find abasis element for the compact-open topology that contains_f and lies in $B c ( f , \epsilon )$

Each point x of X has a neighborhood $\pmb { V } _ { \pmb { x } }$ such that $f ( { \bar { V } } _ { x } )$ lies in an open set $U _ { x }$ of Y having diameter less than ∈．[For example,choose $\nu _ { x }$ so that $f ( V _ { x } )$ lies in the ∈/4-neighborhood of $f ( x )$ . Then $f ( { \bar { V } } _ { x } )$ lies in the ∈/3-neighborhood of $f ( x )$ which has diameter at most $2 \epsilon / 3 . ]$ Cover C by finitely many such sets $V _ { x }$ say for ${ \pmb x } = { \pmb x } _ { 1 } , \ldots , { \pmb x } _ { n }$ .Let $C _ { x } = \bar { V } _ { x } \cap C$ . Then $C _ { x }$ is compact,and the basis element

$$
S ( C _ { x _ { 1 } } , U _ { x _ { 1 } } ) \cap \cdots \cap S ( C _ { x _ { n } } , U _ { x _ { n } } )
$$

contains f and lies in $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ ,as desired.

Corollary 46.9. Let Y be a metric space The compact convergence topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ does not depend on the metric of Y.Therefore if X is compact,the uniform topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ does not depend on the metric of Y.

The fact that the definition of the compact-open topology does not involve a metric is just one of its useful features.Another is the fact that it satisfies the requirement of "joint continuity.”Roughly speaking,this means that the expression $f ( x )$ is continuous not only in the single “variable”x,but is continuous jointly in both the "variables”x and f More precisely,one has the following theorem.

Theorem 46.1o. Let X be locally compact Hausdorff; let ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ have the compactopen topology. Then the map

$$
e : X \times { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y ) \to Y
$$

defined by the equation

$$
e ( x , f ) = f ( x )
$$

is continuous

The map e is called the evaluation map.

Proof.Given a point $( x , f )$ of ${ \pmb X } \times \pmb { \mathcal { C } } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb Y } )$ and an open set V in Y about the image point $e ( x , f ) = f ( x )$ ,we wish to find an open set about $( x , f )$ that e maps into V. First,using the continuity of f and the fact that X is locally_compact Hausdorff,we can choose an open set U about x having compact closure $\bar { \upsilon }$ ,such that f carries $\bar { \upsilon }$ into V.Then consider the open set $U \times S ( \bar { U } , V )$ in $X \times \mathcal { C } ( X , Y )$ . lt is an open set containing $( x , f )$ . And if $( x ^ { \prime } , f ^ { \prime } )$ belongs to this set,then $e ( x ^ { \prime } , f ^ { \prime } ) = f ^ { \prime } ( x ^ { \prime } )$ belongs to V,as desired. □

A consequence of this theorem is the theorem that follows.It is useful in algebraic topology.

Definition. Given a function $f : X \times Z \to Y$ ,there isa corresponding function $F : Z \to { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ,defined by the equation

$$
( F ( z ) ) ( x ) = f ( x , z ) .
$$

Conversely, given $\boldsymbol { F } \cdot \boldsymbol { Z } \to \mathcal { C } ( \boldsymbol { X } , \boldsymbol { Y } )$ ,this equation defines a corresponding function $f : X \times Z \to Y$ .We say that Fis the map of Z into ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ that is induced by f.

\*Theorem 46.11. Let X and Y be spaces; give ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ the compact-open topology. $I f f : X \times Z \to Y$ is continuous,then so is the induced function $F : Z \to { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ The converse holds if X is locallycompact Hausdorff.

Proof.Suppose first that F is continuous and that X is locally compact Hausdorff.lt follows that f is continuous,since f equals the composite

$$
\begin{array} { r } { X \times Z \xrightarrow { i _ { X } \times \bar { F } } X \times \mathcal { C } ( X , Y ) \xrightarrow { \ell } Y ~ , } \end{array}
$$

where $i _ { X }$ is the identity map of X.

Now suppose that f is continuous. To prove continuity of F,we take a point zo of Zand a subbasis element $s ( C , U )$ for ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ containing $F ( z _ { 0 } )$ ,and find a neighborhood W of ${ \boldsymbol { z } } _ { 0 }$ that is mapped by F into $s ( C , U )$ . This will suffice.

The statement that $F ( z _ { 0 } )$ lies in $s ( C , U )$ means simply that $( F ( z _ { 0 } ) ) ( x ) = f ( x , z _ { 0 } )$ is in U for all ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb C }$ That is, $f ( C \times z _ { 0 } ) \subset U$ .Continuity of f implies that $f ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is an open set in $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Z }$ containing $C \times z _ { 0 }$ Then

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( U ) \cap ( C \times Z )
$$

is an open set in the subspace $c \times z$ containing the slice $C \times z _ { 0 }$ .The tube lemma of \$26 implies that there is a neighborhood W of $z _ { 0 }$ in $z$ such that the entire tube $c \times w$ lies in $\bar { \ b { f } } ^ { - 1 } ( \ b { U } )$ . See Figure 46.2.Then for $z \in W$ and ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb C }$ ,we have $f ( x , z ) \in U$ . Hence ${ \cal F } ( W ) \subset { \cal S } ( C , U )$ ,as desired. □

<!-- image-->  
Figure 46.2

We discuss briefly the conneclions between the compact-open topology and the concept of homotopy,which arises in algebraic topology

If f and g are continuous maps of X into Y,we say that f and g are homotopic if there is a continuous map

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { h } & { { } X \times \{ 0 , 1 \} \longrightarrow Y } \end{array}
$$

such that $h ( x , 0 ) = f ( x )$ and $h ( x , 1 ) = g ( x )$ for each $x \in X$ 、The map h is called a homotopy between f and g.

Roughly speaking,a homotopy is a "continuous one-parameter family" of maps from X to Y More precisely，we note that a homolopy h gives rise to a map

$$
H \cdot [ 0 , 1 ] \longrightarrow { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )
$$

that assigns,to each parameter value  in [O,1],the corresponding continuous map from X to Y.Assuming that X is locally compact Hausdorff,we see that h is conunuous if and only if H is conunuous This means that a homotopy h between fand g corresponds precisely to a path in the function space ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ from the point f of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ to the point g

We shall return to a more detailed study of homotopy in Part II of the book.

## Exercises

1. Show that the sets $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ form a basis for a topology on $\gamma ^ { X }$

2.Prove Theorem 46.7.

3. Show that the set B(R,R) of bounded functions $f : \mathbb { R }  \mathbb { R }$ is closed in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \mathbf { R } }$ in the uruform topology, but not in the topology of compact convergence.

4.Consider the sequence of continuous functions $f _ { n } : \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ defined by

$$
f _ { n } ( x ) = x / n .
$$

In which of the three topologies of Theorem 46.7 does thus sequence converge? Ans wer the same question for the sequence given in Exercise 9 of \$21.

5.Consider the sequence of functions $f _ { n } \mathrm { ~ . ~ } ( - 1 , 1 )  \mathbb { R }$ defined by

$$
f _ { n } ( x ) = \sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } k x ^ { k } .
$$

(a） Show that $( f _ { n } )$ converges in the topology of compact convergence; conclude that the lmit function is continuous.(This is a standard fact about power series.)

(b） Show that $( f _ { n } )$ does not converge in the uniform topology

6. Show that in the compact-open topology, ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ is Hausdorff if Y is Hausdorff, and regular ifY is regular.[Hint:If $\bar { \upsilon } \subset \nu$ ,then ${ \overline { { S ( C , U ) } } } \subset S ( C , V ) . ]$

7. Show that if Y is locally compact Hausdorff, then composituon of maps

$$
{ \mathfrak { C } } ( X , Y ) \times { \mathfrak { C } } ( Y , Z ) \longrightarrow { \mathfrak { C } } ( X , Z )
$$

is continuous,provided the compact-open topology is used throughout.[Hint: If $g \circ f \in S ( C , U )$ ,find V such that $f ( C ) \subset V$ and $g ( { \bar { V } } ) \subset U . ]$

8. Let ${ \mathcal { C } } ^ { \prime } ( X , Y )$ denote the set ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ in some topology $\mathcal { T }$ Show that if the evaluation map

$$
e : X \times { \mathcal { C } } ^ { \prime } ( X , Y ) \longrightarrow Y
$$

is continuous,then J contains the compact-open topology.[Hint: The induced map $E : { \mathcal { C } } ^ { \prime } ( X , Y ) \to { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ is continuous.]

9. Here is an (unexpected) application of Theorem 46 1l to quotient maps. (Compare Exercise Il of \$29.)

Theorem. $I f p : A \to B$ is a quotient map and X is locally compact Hausdorff,   
then $i _ { X } \times \boldsymbol { p } \cdot \boldsymbol { X } \times \boldsymbol { A }  \boldsymbol { X } \times \boldsymbol { B }$ is a quotient map. Proof.

(a)Let Y be the quotient space induced by $i \chi \times p ;$ let $q : X \times A \to Y$ be the quotient map. Show there is a bijective continuous map $f \cdot Y \to X \times B$ such that $f \circ q = i _ { X } \times _ { \mathfrak { p } }$

(b） Let $g = f ^ { - 1 }$ .Let $\textit { \textbf { G . B } } \to \mathcal { C } ( \boldsymbol { X } , \boldsymbol { Y } )$ and $Q : A \to { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ be the maps induced by g and q,respectively. Show that $Q = G \circ p .$

(c） Show that Q is continuous; conclude that G is continuous,so that g is continuous.

\*10.A space is locally compact if it can be covered by open sets each of which is contained in a compact subspace of X It is said to be g-compact if it can be covered by countably many such open sets.

(a)Show that if X is locally compact and second-countable,it is g-compact.

(b) Let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space.Show that if X is g-compact,there is a metnc for the topology of compact convergence on $\gamma ^ { X }$ such that if $( Y , d )$ is complete, $\gamma ^ { \dot { x } }$ is complete in this metric.[Hint: Let $A _ { 1 } , A _ { 2 } , .$ . be a countable collection of compact subspaces of X whose interiors cover X.Let $\boldsymbol { Y } _ { t }$ denote the set of all functions from $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ to Y,in the uniform topology. Define a homeomorphism of $\gamma ^ { x }$ with a closed subspace of the product space $Y _ { 1 } \times Y _ { 2 } \times \cdots \}$

11. Let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space; let X be a space.Define a topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ as follows: Given $f \in { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ,and given a positive continuous function $\delta : X \to$ $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ on X,let

$$
B ( f , \delta ) = \{ g \mid d ( f ( x ) , g ( x ) ) < \delta ( x ) { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ a l l ~ } } x \in X \} .
$$

(a) Show that the sets $B ( f , \delta )$ form a basis for a topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ . We call it the fine topology.

(b） Showthat the fine topology contains the uniform topology.

(c） Show that if X is compact,the fine and uniform topologies agree.

(d） Show that if X is discrete,then ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y ) = Y ^ { X }$ and the fine and box topologies agree.

## \$47Ascoli's Theorem

Now we prove a more general version of Ascoli's theorem. It characterizes the compact subspaces of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ in the topology of compact convergence. The proof, however,involves all three of our standard function space topologies: the topology of pointwise convergence,the topology of compact convergence,and the uniform topology.

Theorem 47.1 (Ascoli's theorem). Let X be a space and let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space. Give ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ the topology of compact convergence; let $\mathcal { F }$ be a subset of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$

(a) $\boldsymbol { H } \mathcal { F }$ is equicontinuous underd and the set

$$
{ \mathcal { F } } _ { a } = \{ f ( a ) ~ | ~ f \in { \mathcal { F } } \}
$$

has compact closure for each $a \in X$ ,then $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ is contained in a compact subspace of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$

(b） The converse holds if X is locally compact Hausdorff.

Proof of (a).Throughout, we give $\gamma ^ { x }$ the product topology, which is the same as the topology of pointwise convergence. Then $\gamma ^ { x }$ is a Hausdorff space. The space ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ ，which has the topology of compact convergence,is not a subspace of $\gamma ^ { x }$ Let g be the closure of $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ in $\gamma ^ { \bar { x } }$

Step 1.We show that $\mathfrak { g }$ is a compact subspace of $\gamma ^ { X }$ . Given ${ \pmb { a } } \in { \pmb { X } }$ let $C _ { a }$ denote the closure of $\mathcal { F } _ { a }$ in $\gamma _ { \mathrm { i } }$ by hypothesis, $C _ { a }$ is a compact subspace of Y. The set $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ is contained in the product space

$$
\prod _ { a \in X } C _ { a } ,
$$

since this product by definition consists of all functions $f : X \to Y$ satisfying the conditon $f ( a ) \ \in \ C _ { a }$ for all a．This product space is compact,by the Tychonoff theorem; it is a closed subspace of the product space $\gamma ^ { x }$ . Because $\mathfrak { g }$ equals the closure of $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ in $\gamma ^ { \chi }$ ,g is contained in $\prod C _ { a }$ , being closed, $\mathfrak { g }$ is therefore compact.

Step 2.We show that each function belonging to $\mathfrak { g }$ is continuous,and indeed that $\mathfrak { g }$ itself is equicontinuous under $\pmb { d } .$

Given $x _ { 0 } \in X$ and $\epsilon > 0$ ,choose a neighborhood U of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ such that

$$
d ( f ( x ) , f ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 \qquad \mathrm { f o r ~ a l l ~ } f \in { \mathcal { F } } { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ a l l ~ } } x \in U .\tag{*}
$$

We shall show that $d ( g ( x ) , g ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon$ for all $g \in { \mathfrak { g } }$ and all ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb U }$ ; it follows that $g$ is equicontinuous.

Let $g \in { \mathfrak { g } }$ and let x be a point of $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ Define $\pmb { V _ { x } }$ to be the subset of $\gamma ^ { x }$ , open in $\gamma ^ { x }$ consistng of all elements h of $\gamma ^ { x }$ such that

$$
d ( h ( x ) , g ( x ) ) < \epsilon / 3 \qquad \mathrm { a n d } \qquad d ( h ( x _ { 0 } ) , g ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 .
$$

Because $\pmb { \mathscr { z } }$ belongs to the closure of $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ ,the neighborhood $\pmb { V _ { x } }$ of $\pmb { g }$ must contain an element $f$ of $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ Applying the triangle inequality to (\*）and (\*\*),it follows that $d ( g ( x ) , g ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon$ ,as desired.

Step 3.We show that the product topology on $\gamma ^ { x }$ and the compact convergence topology on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ coincide on the subset $g$

In general,the compact convergence topology is finer than the product topology. We prove that the reverse holds for the subset $\mathfrak { g }$ Let $\pmb { g }$ be an element of ${ \mathfrak { g } } ,$ and let $B c ( \pmb { g } , \epsilon )$ be a basis element for the compact convergence topology on $\gamma ^ { x }$ that contains g. We find a basis element B for the pointwise convergence topology on $\gamma ^ { x }$ that contains g such that

$$
\{ B \cap \{ \emptyset \} \subset \{ B _ { C } ( g , \epsilon ) \cap \{ \} .
$$

Using equicontinuity of $g$ and compactness of $c$ ,we can cover C by finitely many open sets $U _ { 1 } , \dots , U _ { n }$ of $\pmb { \chi }$ containing points $x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n }$ ,respectively,such that for each i,we have

$$
d ( g ( x ) , g ( x _ { i } ) ) < \epsilon / 3
$$

for $x \in U _ { i }$ and $g \in { \mathfrak { g } }$ .Then we define B to be the basis element for $\gamma ^ { x }$ defi ned by the equation

$$
B = \{ h \mid h \in Y ^ { X } { \mathrm { a n d } } d ( h ( x _ { i } ) , g ( x _ { i } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 { \mathrm { f o r } } i = 1 , \ldots , n \} .
$$

We show that if h is an element of $B \cap { \mathfrak { g } }$ ,thenh belongs to $B c ( \pmb { g } , \epsilon )$ . That is, we show that $d ( h ( x ) , g ( x ) ) < \epsilon$ for ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb C }$ Given $x \in C$ ,choose i so that $x \in U _ { i }$ . Then

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { d ( h ( x ) , h ( x _ { i } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 } & { { } \mathrm { ~ a n d } } \\ { d ( g ( x ) , g ( x _ { i } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 } \end{array}
$$

because $x \in U _ { i }$ and $g , h \in \mathcal { E }$ ,while

$$
d ( h ( x _ { i } ) , g ( x _ { i } ) ) < \epsilon / 3
$$

because $\textbf { \textit { h } } \in \textbf { \textit { B } }$ It follows from the triangle inequality that $d ( h ( x ) , g ( x ) ) \ < \ \epsilon$ ，as desired.

Step 4. We complete the proof. The set $\mathfrak { g }$ contains $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ and is contained in ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ It is compact as a subspace of $\gamma ^ { x }$ in the product topology. By the result just proved, it is also compact as a subspace of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ in the compact convergence topology.

Proof of (b). Let $\pmb { \mathcal { H } }$ be a compact subspace of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ that contains $\mathscr { F }$ . We show that $\pmb { \mathcal { H } }$ is equicontinuous and that $\mathcal { H } _ { a }$ is compact for each ${ \pmb { a } } \in { \pmb { X } }$ . It follows that $\pmb { \mathcal { F } }$ is

equicontinuous (since $\mathcal { F } \subset \mathcal { H } )$ , and that $\mathcal { F } _ { \pmb { a } }$ lies in the compact subspace $\mathcal { H } _ { a }$ of Y, so that $\breve { \mathscr F } _ { a }$ is compact.

To show $\mathcal { H } _ { a }$ is compact, consider the composite of the map

$$
j : { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y ) \to X \times { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )
$$

defined by $j ( f ) = a \times f$ ,and the evaluaton map

$$
e : X \times { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y ) \to Y ,
$$

given by the equation $e ( x \times f ) = f ( x )$ . The map j is obviously continuous,and the map e is continuous by Theorems 46.8 and 46.10. The composite eo j maps JHf to $\mathcal { H } _ { a }$ since H is compact, so is $\mathcal { H } _ { a }$ ·

Now we show that J is equicontinuous at a,relative to the metric d. Let A be a compact subspace of X that contains a neighborhood of a.It suffices to show that the subset

$$
{ \mathcal { R } } = \{ f | A \ ; \ f \in { \mathcal { H } } \}
$$

of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )$ is equicontinuous at a.

Give ${ \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )$ the compact convergence topology. We show that the restnction map

$$
r : { \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y ) \to { \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )
$$

is continuous.Let f be an element of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ and let $B = B _ { C } ( f | A , \epsilon )$ bea basis element for ${ \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )$ containing $f | A$ ，where C is a compact subspace of A.Then C is a compact subspace of X,and r maps the neighborhood $B c ( f , \epsilon )$ of f in ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , Y )$ into B.

The map r maps Honto R; because H is compact,so is R.Now R is a subspace of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )$ ; because A is compact,the compact convergence and the uniform topologies on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )$ coincide.It follows from Theorem 45.1 that R is totally bounded in the uniform metric on ${ \mathcal { C } } ( A , Y )$ ; then Lemma 45.2 implies that R is equicontinuous relative to d.

An even more general version of Ascoli's theorem may be found in [K] or [Wd]. There it is not assumed that Y is a metric space,but only that it has what is called a uniform structure,which is a generalization of the notion of metric.

Ascoli's theorem has many applications in analysis, but these lie outside the scope of this book.See [K-F] for several such applications.

## Exercises

1.Which of the following subsets of C(R,R)are pointwise bounded? Which are equicontinuous?

(a) The collection $[ f _ { n } \}$ ,where $f _ { n } ( x ) = x + \sin { n x }$

(b） The collection $\left\{ g _ { n } \right\}$ ,where $g _ { n } ( x ) = n + \sin { x }$

(c） The collection $\{ h _ { n } \}$ ,where $h _ { n } ( x ) = | x | ^ { 1 / n }$

(d） The collection $\{ \pmb { k _ { n } } \}$ , where $k _ { n } ( x ) = n \sin ( x / n )$

2.Prove the following'

Theorem.If X is a locally compact Hausdorff space,then a subspace F of ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , \mathbb { R } ^ { n } )$ in the topology of compact convergence has compact closure if and onlyif F is pointwise bounded and equicontinuous under either of the standard metrics on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$

3.Show that the general version of Ascoli's theorem implies the classical version (Theorem 45.4) when X is Hausdorff.

4. Prove the following:

Theorem (Arzela's theorem,general version).Let X be a Hausdorff space that is g-compact; let $f _ { n }$ be a sequence of functions $f _ { n } : X \to \mathbb { R } ^ { k }$ . If the collection $\{ f _ { n } \}$ is pointwise bounded and equicontinuous,then the sequence $f _ { n }$ has a subsequence that converges,in the topology of compact convergence,to a continuous function.

{Hint: Show ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , \mathbb { R } ^ { k } )$ is first-countable.}

5. Let $( Y , d )$ be a metric space; let $f _ { n } : X \to Y$ be a sequence of continuous functions; let $f : X \to Y$ be a function (not necessarily continuous). Suppose $f _ { n }$ converges to f in the topology of pointwise convergence. Show that if $\{ f _ { n } \}$ is equicontinuous,then f is continuous and $f _ { n }$ converges to f in the topology of compact convergence.