Corollary 6.6.IfB is a subset of the finite set A,then B is finite.If B is a proper subsetof A,then the cardinality of B is less than the cardinality of A.

Corollary 6.7. Let B be a nonempty set. Then the following are equivalent

(1)B is finite.

(2） There is a surjective function from a section of the positive integers onto B.

(3）There is an injective function from B into asection of the positive integers.

Proof $( 1 ) \Longrightarrow ( 2 )$ . Since B is nonempty,there is,for some n,a bijective function $f : \{ 1 , \dots , n \}  B$

(2) = (3). If $f : \{ 1 , \dots , n \}  B$ is surjecuve, define g . $B  \{ 1 , . . . , n \}$ by the equation

$$
g ( b ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b \} ) .
$$

Because f is surjective,the set $f ^ { - 1 } \{ ( b ) \}$ is nonempty; then the well-ordering property of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ tells us that $g ( b )$ is uniquely defined. The map g is injective,for if $b \neq b ^ { \prime } .$ then the sets $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b \} )$ and $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b ^ { \prime } \} )$ are disjoint,so their smallest elements must be different.

$( 3 ) \implies ( 1 ) . \mathrm { ~ l f ~ } g : B \to \{ 1 , \dots , n \}$ is injective,then changing the range Of g gives a bijection of B with a subset of $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ . It follows from the preceding corollary that B is finite. □

Corollary 6.8.Finite unions and finite cartesian products of finite sets are finite.

Proof.We first show that if A and B are finite,so is AUB.The result is trivial if A or B is empty. Otherwise,there are bijections $f : \{ 1 , \dots , m \}  A$ and $\textbf { \em g } :$ $\{ 1 , \dots , n \} \  \ B$ for some choice of m and n. Define a function h. $\left\{ \mathsf { I } , \ldots , m + \right.$ $n \} \to \ A \cup B$ by setting $\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { h } ( i ) = f ( i ) } \end{array}$ for i = 1,2,..., m and $h ( i ) = g ( i - m )$ for $i = m + 1 , \ldots , m + n$ .It is easy to check that h is surjective,from which it follows that A U B is finite.

Now we show by induction that finiteness of the sets $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n }$ implies finiteness of their union.This result is trivial for $\pmb { n = 1 }$ Assuming it true for $\pmb { n } - 1$ ,we note that $A _ { 1 } \cup \dots \cup A _ { n }$ is the union of the two finite sets $A _ { 1 } \cup \dots \cup A _ { n - 1 }$ and $A _ { n }$ ,so the result of the preceding paragraph applies.

Now we show that the cartesian product of two finite sets A and B is finite.Given $a \ \in \ A$ theset $\smash { \left\{ a \right\} \times B }$ is finite,being in bijective correspondence with B． The set $A \times B$ is the union of these sets; since there are only finitely many of them, $A \times B$ is a finite union of finite sets and thus finite.

To prove that the product $A _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times A _ { n }$ is finite if each $A _ { i }$ is finite,one proceeds by induction.

## Exercises

1. (a)Make a list of all the injective maps

$$
f : \{ 1 , 2 , 3 \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 \} .
$$

Show that none is bijective.(This constitutes a direct proof that a set A of cardinality three does not have cardinality four.)

(b） How many injective maps

$$
f \cdot \{ 1 , \dots , 8 \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \dots , 1 0 \}
$$

are there?(You can see why one would not wish to try to prove directly that there is no bijective correspondence between these sets.)

2.Show that if B is not finite and $B \subset A$ ,then A is not finite.

3.Let X be the two-element set {0,1}.Find a bijective correspondence between $\pmb { X ^ { \omega } }$ and a proper subset of itself.

4. Let A be a nonempty finite simply ordered set.

(a) Show that A has a largest element.[Hint: Proceed by induction on the cardinality of A.}

(b) Show that A has the order type of a section of the positive integers.

5. If $A \times B$ is finite,does it follow that A and B are finite?

6. (a) Let $A = \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ .Show there is a bijection of ${ \mathcal { P } } ( A )$ with the cartesian product $X ^ { n }$ ,where X is the two-element set $X = \{ 0 , 1 \}$

(b）Show that if A is finite,then ${ \mathcal { P } } ( A )$ is finite.

7. If A and B are finite,show that the set of all functions $f : A  B$ is finite.

## \$7Countable and Uncountable Sets

Just as sections of the positive integers are the prototypes for the finite sets,the set of all the positive integers is the prototype for what we callthe countably infinite sets. In this section,we shall study such sets;we shall also construct some sets that are neither finite nor countably infinite. This study willead us into a discussion of what we mean by the process of “inductive definition."

Definition.A set A is said to be infinite if it is not finite. It is said to be countably infinite if there is a bijective correspondence

$$
f : A \longrightarrow \mathbb { Z } _ { + } .
$$

EXAMPLE 1．The set Z of all integers is countably infinite. One checks easily that the function $f : \mathbb { Z } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ defined by

$$
f ( n ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { 2 n } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } n > 0 , } \\ { - 2 n + 1 } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } n \leq 0 } \end{array} \right. }
$$

is a bijection.

ExAMPLE 2． The product $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is countably infinite.lf werepresent the elements of the product $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ by the integer points in the first quadrant,then the left-hand portion of Figure 7.1 suggests how to“count"the points,that is,how to put them in bijective correspondence with the positive integers.A picture is not a proof,of course,but this picture suggests a proof.First,we define a bijection $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ ,where A is the subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ Consisting of pairs $( x , y )$ for which $y \leq x$ ,by the equation

$$
f ( x , y ) = ( x + y - 1 , y ) .
$$

Then we construct a bijection of A with the positive integers,defining $g \mathrm { ~ . ~ } A \ \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ by the formula

$$
g ( x , y ) = { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } ( x - 1 ) x + y .
$$

We leave it to you to show that f and g are bijections.

Another proof that $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is countably infinite wil be given later.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 7.1

Definition.Aset is said to be countable if it is either finite or countably irnfinite. A set that is not countable is said to be uncountable.

There is a very useful criterion for showing that a set is countable.It is the following:

Theorem 7.1. Let B be a nonempty set. Then the following are equivalent:

(1）B is countable

(2） There is a surjective function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to B$

(3）There is an injective function $g : B \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

Proof. $( 1 ) \Longrightarrow ( 2 )$ . Suppose that B is countable.If B is countably infinite,there is a bijection $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to B$ by definition,and we are through．If B is finite,there is a

bijection $h : \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} \to B$ for some $n \geq 1$ . (Recall that $B \neq \emptyset . )$ We can extend h to a surjection $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to B$ by defining

$$
f ( i ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { { h ( i ) } } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ l ~ } \leq i \leq n , } } \\ { { h ( 1 ) } } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } i > n . } } \end{array} \right.
$$

(2) $\implies ( 3 )$ . Let $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to B$ be a surjection. Define $g : B \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ by the equation

$$
g ( b ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b \} ) .
$$

Because f is surjective, $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b \} )$ is nonempty; thus g is well defined. The map gis injective,for if $ { \boldsymbol { b } } \neq  { \boldsymbol { b } } ^ { \prime }$ ,the sets $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b \} )$ and $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ b ^ { \prime } \} )$ are disjoint, so their smallest elements are different.

$( 3 ) \Longrightarrow ( 1 )$ . Let $g : B \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ be an injection;we wish to prove B is countable. By changing the range of g,we can obtain a bijection of B with a subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . Thus to prove our result, it suffices to show that every subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is countable. So let C bea subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

If C is finite,it is countable by definition.So what we need to prove is that every infinite subset C of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is countably infinite.This statement is certainly plausible.For the elements of C can easily be arranged in an infinite sequence; one simply takes the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ in its usual order and “erases"all the elements of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ that are not in C!

The plausibility of this argument may make one overlook its informality. Providing a formal proof requires a certain amount of care. We state this result as a separate lemma,which follows. □

Lemma 7.2. If C is an infinite subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,then C is countably infinite.

Proof.We define a bijection $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to C$ .We proceed by induction. Define $\pmb { h } ( 1 )$ to be the smallest element of C; it exists because every nonempty subset C of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ has a smallest element. Then assuming that $h ( 1 ) , \ldots , h ( n - 1 )$ are defined,define

$$
h ( n ) = { \mathrm { ~ s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } [ C - h ( \{ 1 , \ldots , n - 1 \} ) ] .
$$

The set $C - h ( \{ 1 , \dots , n - 1 \} )$ is not empty; for if it were empty, then $h : \{ 1 , \ldots , n -$ $1 \} \to C$ would be surjective,so that C would be finite (by Corollary 6.7). Thus $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { n } )$ is well defined.By induction,we have defined $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { n } )$ for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ·

To show that h is injective is easy. Given $m < n$ ,note that h(m) belongs to the set $h ( \{ 1 , \ldots , n - 1 \} )$ ,whereas $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { n } )$ ,by definition,does not. Hence $h ( n ) \neq h ( m )$

To show that h is surjective, letc be any element of C;we show that c lies in the image set of h.First note that $h ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ cannot be contained in the finute set $\{ 1 , \ldots , { \pmb { c } } \}$ 小， because $h ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ is infinite (since h is injective). Therefore,there is an n in $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ，such that $h ( n ) > c$ Letm be the smallest element of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,such that $\pmb { h } ( m ) \geq c$ Then for all $i < m$ ,we must have $h ( i ) < c$ 、Thus,c does not belong to the set $h ( \{ 1 , \ldots , m - 1 \} )$ · Since $\pmb { h } ( m )$ is defined as the smallest element of the set $C - h ( \{ 1 , \_ , m - 1 \} )$ ，we must have $\pmb { h } ( m ) \leq \pmb { c }$ .Putting the two inequalities together,we have $\pmb { h } ( m ) = \pmb { c }$ ,as desired. □

There is a point in the preceding proof where we stretched the principles of logic a bit. It occurred at the point where we said that “using the induction principle" we had defined the function h for all positive integers n. You may have seen arguments like this used before,with no questions raised concerning their legitimacy. We have already used such an argument ourselves,in the exercises of $\ S 4 ,$ when we de fined $a ^ { n }$

But there is a problem here. After all,the induction principle states only that if A is an inductive set of positive integers,then $A = \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ To use the principle to prove a theorem “by induction."one begins the proof with the statement “Let A be the set of all positive integers n for which the theorem Is true,"and then one goes ahead to prove that Ais inductive,so that A must be all of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

In the preceding theorem, however, we were not really proving a theorem by induction, but defining something by induction．How then should we start the proof? Can we start by saying,"Let A be the set of allintegers n for which the function h is defined"? But that's silly; the symbol h has no meaning at the outset of the proof. It only takes on meaning in the course of the proof. So something more is needed.

What is needed is another principle,which we call the principle of recursive definition. In the proof of the preceding theorem, we wished to assert the following:

Given the infinite subset C of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,there is a unique function $h : \ \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \ C$ satisfying the formula:

h(1)= smallest element of C,

$$
h ( i ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } [ C - h ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) ] \quad { \mathrm { f o r ~ a l l ~ } } i > 1 .\tag{*}
$$

The formula (\*） is called a recursion formula for h; it defines the function h in terms of itself.A definition given by such a formula is called a recursive definition.

Now one can get into logical difficulties when one tries to define something recursively. Not al recursive formulas make sense.The recursive formula

$$
h ( i ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } [ C - h ( \{ 1 , \dots , i + 1 \} ) ] ,
$$

for example,is self-contradictory;although h(i） necessarily is an element of the set $h ( \{ 1 , \ldots , i + 1 \} )$ ,this formula says that it does not belong to the set. Another example is the classic paradox:

Let the barber of Seville shave every man of Seville who does not shave himself.

Who shall shave the barber?

In this statement,the barber appears twice,once in the phrase “the barber of Seville" and once as an element of the set “men of Seville",this definition of whom the barber shall shave is a recursive one.It also happens to be self-contradictory.

Some recursive formulas do make sense,however Specifically,one has the following principle:

Principle of recursive definition.Let A be a set. Given a formula that defi nes h(1) as a unique element of A.and for i > 1 defines h(i） uniquely as an element of A in terms of the values of h for positive integers less than i,this formula determines a unique function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$

This principle is the one we actually used in the proof of Lemma 7.2. You can simply accept it on faith if you like.It may however be proved rigorously,using the principle of induction. We shall formulate it more precisely in the next section and indicate how it is proved. Mathematicians seldom refer to this principle specifically. They are much more likely to wnte a proof like our proof of Lemma 7.2 above,a proof in which they invoke the “induction principle"to define a function when what they are really using is the principle of recursive definition. We shall avoid undue pedantry in this book by following their example.

Corollary 7.3. A subset of a countable set is countable.

Proof.Suppose $A \subset B$ ,where B is countable.There is an injection f of B into $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ the restriction of f to A is an injection of A into $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

Corollary 7.4. The set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is countably infinite.

Proof._In view of Theorem 7.1, it suffices to construct an injective map $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times$ $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ .We define f by the equation

$$
f ( n , m ) = 2 ^ { n } 3 ^ { m } .
$$

It is easy to check that f is injecuve.For suppose that $2 ^ { n } 3 ^ { m } = 2 ^ { p } 3 ^ { q }$ .If $\pmb { n } < p$ then $3 ^ { m } = 2 ^ { p - n } 3 ^ { q }$ ,contradicting the fact that $3 ^ { m }$ is odd for all m.Therefore, $\pmb { n } = p$ As a result, $3 ^ { m } = 3 ^ { q }$ ,Then if $m \ < \ q$ ,it follows that $1 = 3 ^ { q - m }$ ,another contradiction. Hence $m = q$

EXAMPLE3.The sel $\ Q _ { + }$ of positive rational numbers is countably infinite. For we can define a surjection $g \cdot \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Q } _ { + }$ by the equation

$$
g ( n , m ) = m / n
$$

Because $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is countable,there is a surjection $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ .Then the composite $g \circ f \ . \ \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Q } _ { + }$ is a surjection, so that $\mathbb { Q } _ { + }$ is countable. And,of course, $\mathbb { Q } _ { + }$ is infinite because it contains $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

We leave it as an exerciseto show the set Qof all rational numbers is countably infinite.

## Theorem 7.5. A countable union of countable sets is countable.

Proof. Let $\{ A _ { n } \} _ { n \in J }$ be an indexed family of countable sets,where the index set J is either $\{ 1 , \ldots , N \}$ or $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . Assume that each set $A _ { n }$ is nonempty,for convenience;this assumption does not change anything.

Because each $A _ { n }$ is countable,we can choose,for each n,a surjective function $f _ { n } : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A _ { n }$ . Similarly,we can choose a surjective function $g : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to J$ Now define

$$
h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \bigcup _ { n \in J } A _ { n }
$$

by the equation

$$
h ( k , m ) = f _ { g ( k ) } ( m ) .
$$

lt is easy to check that h is surjective.Since $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is in bijective correspondence with $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,the countability of the union follows from Theorem 7.1.

Theorem 7.6. A finite product of countable sets is countable.

Proof.First let us show that the product of two countable sets A and B is countable. The result is trivial if A or B is empty. Otherwise,choose surjective func tions f: $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ and $g : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to B$ .Then the function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A \times B$ defined by the equation $h ( n , m ) = ( f ( n ) , g ( m ) )$ is surjective,so that $A \times B$ is countable.

In general, we proceed by induction. Assuming that $A _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times A _ { n - 1 }$ is countable if each $A _ { i }$ is countable,we prove the same thing for the product $A _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times A _ { n }$ .First, note that there is a bijective correspondence

$$
g : A _ { 1 } \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times A _ { n } \longrightarrow ( A _ { 1 } \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times A _ { n - 1 } ) \times A _ { n }
$$

defined by the equation

$$
g ( x _ { 1 } , \dots , x _ { n } ) = ( ( x _ { 1 } , \dots , x _ { n - 1 } ) , x _ { n } ) .
$$

Because the set $A _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times A _ { n - 1 }$ is countable by the induction assumption and $A _ { n }$ is countable by hypothesis,the product of these two sets is countable,as proved in the preceding paragraph.We conclude that $A _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times A _ { n }$ is countable as well. ■

It is very tempting to assert that countable products of countable sets should be countable; but this assertion is in fact not true:

Theorem 7.7． Let X denote the two element set {0,1}. Then the set $X ^ { \omega }$ is uncountable.

Proof.We show that, given any function

$$
g : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \longrightarrow X ^ { \omega } ,
$$

$\pmb { g }$ is not surjective.For this purpose,let us denote ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb n } )$ as follows :

$$
g ( n ) = ( x _ { n 1 } , x _ { n 2 } , x _ { n 3 } , . . . x _ { n m } , . . . ) ,
$$

where each $\pmb { x } _ { i j }$ is either O or 1.Then we define an element $\mathbf { y } = ( y _ { 1 } , y _ { 2 } , \ldots , y _ { n } , \ldots )$ of $X ^ { \omega }$ by letting

$$
y _ { n } = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { 0 } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x _ { n n } = 1 , } \\ { 1 } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x _ { n n } = 0 . } \end{array} \right. }
$$

(If we write the numbers $x _ { n }$ ina rectangular array,the particular elements $x _ { n n }$ appear as the diagonal entries in this array; we choose y so that its nth coordinate differs from the diagonal entry $x _ { n n } . )$

Now y is an element of $X ^ { \omega }$ ,and y does not lie in the image of g;given n,the point ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb n } )$ and the point y differ in at least one coordinate,namely,the nth. Thus,g is not surjective. ■

The cartesian product $\{ 0 , 1 \} ^ { \omega }$ is one example of an uncountable set. Another is the set $\mathcal { P } ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ ,as the following theorem imples:

Theorem 7.8.Let A be a set. There is no injective map $f : { \mathcal { P } } ( A ) \to A$ ,and there is no surjective map $g : A  { \mathcal { P } } ( A )$

Proof.In general,if B is a nonemptyset,the existence of an injective map $f : B $ C implies the existence of a surjective map $g \mathrm { ~ . ~ } C  B$ ：onedefines $g ( c ) = f ^ { - 1 } ( c )$ for each c in the image set of $f$ and defines g arbitrarly on the rest of C.

Therefore, it suffices to prove that given a map $g : A \to { \mathcal { P } } ( A )$ ,the map g is not surjective For each $a \in A$ ,the image ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb a } )$ of a is a subset of A,which may or may not contain the point a itself.Let B be the subset of A consisting of all those points a such that ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb a } )$ does not contain a;

$$
B = \{ a \mid a \in A - g ( a ) \} .
$$

Now,B may be empty,or it may be allof A,but that does not matter.We assert that B is a subset of A that does not lie in the image of ${ \pmb g } .$ For suppose that ${ \pmb B } = { \pmb g } ( { \pmb a } _ { 0 } )$ for some $a _ { 0 } \in A$ .We ask the question: Does $_ { a _ { 0 } }$ belong to B or not? By definition of B,

$$
a _ { 0 } \in B \Longleftrightarrow a _ { 0 } \in A - g ( a _ { 0 } ) \Longleftrightarrow a _ { 0 } \in A - B .
$$

In either case,we have a contradiction.

Now we have proved the existence of uncountable sets. But we have not yet mentioned the most familiar uncountable set of all-the set of real numbers. You have probably seen the uncountability of R demonstrated already. If one assumes that every real number can be represented uniquely by an infinite decimal (with the proviso that a representation ending in an infinite string of ${ \pmb { 9 } } ^ { \prime } { \pmb { \mathsf { s } } }$ is forbidden),then the uncountability of the reals can be proved by a variant of the diagonal procedure used in the proof of Theorem 7.7. But this proof is in some ways not very satisfying.One reason is that the infinite decimal representation of a real number is not at all an elementary consequence of the axioms but requires a good deal of labor to prove. Another reason is that the uncountability of R does not,in fact,depend on the infinite decimal expansion of R or indeed on any of the algebraic properties of R; it depends on only the order properties of R．We shall demonstrate the uncountability of R,using only its order properties,in a later chapter.

## Exercises

1. Show that Q is countably infinite.

2. Show that the maps f and g of Examples l and 2 are bijections.

3.Let X be the two-element set (O,1. Show there is a bijective correspondence between the set $\mathcal { P } ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ and the cartesian product $X ^ { \omega }$

4. (a)A real number x is said to be algebraic (over the rationals)if it satis fies some polynomial equation of positive degree

$$
x ^ { n } + a _ { n - 1 } x ^ { n - 1 } + \cdot \cdot \cdot + a _ { 1 } x + a _ { 0 } = 0
$$

with rational coefficients $a _ { i }$ ． Assumung that each polynomial equ ation has only finitely many roots,show that the set of algebraic numbers is countable.

(b) A real number is said to be transcendental if it is not algebraic. Assuming the reals are uncountable,show that the transcendental numbers are uncountable.(It is a somewhat surprising fact that only two transcendental numbers are familiar to us:e and π.Even proving these two numbers transcendental is highly nontrivial.)

5.Determine,for each of the following sets,whether or not it is countable. Justify your answers.

(a） The set A of all functions $f : \{ 0 , 1 \} \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(b) The set ${ \pmb { B _ { n } } }$ of all functions $f : \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(c） The set $\textstyle C = \bigcup _ { n \in \mathbf { Z } _ { + } } B _ { n }$

(d）The set D of all functions $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(e） The set E of all functions $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \{ 0 , 1 \} .$

(f） The set F of all functions $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \{ 0 , 1 \}$ that are “eventually zero." [We say that f is eventually zero if there is a positive integer N such that $f ( n ) = 0$ for all $n \geq N \ ]$

(g） The set G of all functions $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ that are eventually 1.

(h）The set H of all functions $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ that are eventually constant.

(i）The set / of all two-element subsets of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(j）The set Jof all finite subsets of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

6. We say that two sets A and B have the same cardinality if there is a bijection of A with B.

(a） Show that if $B \subset A$ and if there isan injection

$$
f : A \longrightarrow B ,
$$

then A and B have the same cardinality. [Hint:Define $\pmb { A } _ { 1 } = \pmb { A } , \pmb { B } _ { 1 } = \pmb { B }$ and for $n > 1 , A _ { n } = f ( A _ { n - 1 } )$ and $B _ { n } = f ( B _ { n - 1 } )$ .(Recursive definition again!） Note that $A _ { 1 } \supset B _ { 1 } \supset A _ { 2 } \supset B _ { 2 } \supset A _ { 3 } \supset \cdots$ .Define a bijection $h : A  B$ by the rule

$$
h ( x ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { f ( x ) } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x \in A _ { n } - B _ { n } { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ s o m e ~ } } n , } \\ { x } & { { \mathrm { o t h e r w i s e . } } } \end{array} \right. }
$$

(b）Theorem (Schroeder-Bernstein theorem).If there are injections $f : A $ C and $g : C \to A$ ，then A and C have the same cardinality.

7. Show that the sets D and E of Exercise 5 have the same cardinality.

8.Let X denote the two-element set {O,1}; let B be the set of countable subsets of $X ^ { \omega }$ . Show that $X ^ { \omega }$ and B have the same cardinality.

9.(a） The formula

(\*）

$$
\begin{array} { l } { h ( 1 ) = 1 , } \\ { h ( 2 ) = 2 , } \\ { h ( n ) = [ h ( n + 1 ) ] ^ { 2 } - [ h ( n - 1 ) ] ^ { 2 } \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } n \geq 2 } \end{array}
$$

is not one to which the principle of recursive definition applies. Show that nevertheless there does exist a function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R }$ satisfying this formula. [Hint: Reformulate (\*) so that the principle will apply and require h to be positive.]

(b) Show that the formula (\*) of part (a) does not determine h uniquely. [Hint: If h is a positive function satisfying (\*),let $f ( i ) = h ( i )$ for $i \neq 3$ andlet $f ( 3 ) = - h ( 3 ) . ]$

(c） Show that there is no function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R }$ satisfying the formula

$$
\begin{array} { l } { h ( 1 ) = 1 , } \\ { h ( 2 ) = 2 , } \\ { h ( n ) = [ h ( n + 1 ) ] ^ { 2 } + [ h ( n - 1 ) ] ^ { 2 } \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } n \geq 2 . } \end{array}
$$

## \*\$8The Principle of Recursive Definition

Before considering the general form of the principle of recursive definition,let us first prove it in a specific case,that of Lemma 7.2. That should make the underlying idea of the proof much clearer when we consider the general case.

So,given the infinite subset C of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,let us consider the following recursion formula fora function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to C$

（\*）

h(l)= smallest element of C,

$$
h ( \mathrm { i } ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } [ C - h ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) ] \quad { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } i > 1 .
$$

We shall prove that there exists a unique function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to C$ satisfying this recursion formula.

The first step is to prove that there exist functions defined on sections $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ that satisfy (\*):

Lemma 8.1. Given $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,there exists a function

$$
f : \{ 1 , \dots , n \} \to C
$$

that satisfies (\*) foralli in its domain.

ProofThe point of this lemma is that it is astatement that depends on ${ \pmb n } ;$ th erefore, it is capable of being proved by induction.Let A be the set of alln for which the lemma holds.We show that A is inductive.It then follows that $A = \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

The lemma is true for $n = 1$ ，since the function $f : \{ 1 \} \to C$ defined by the equation

$$
f ( 1 ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } C
$$

satisfies (\*).

Supposing the lemma to be true for n - 1,we prove it true for n. By hypothesis, there is a function $f ^ { \prime } : \{ 1 , \dots , n - 1 \} \to C$ satisfying(\*） for all i in its domain. Define $f : \{ 1 , \dots , n \} \to C$ by the equations

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { f ( i ) = f ^ { \prime } ( \mathfrak { i } ) \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } i \in \{ 1 , \dotsc , n - 1 \} , } \\ & { f ( n ) = \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } [ C - f ^ { \prime } ( \{ 1 , \dotsc , n - 1 \} ) ] . } \end{array}
$$

Since C is infinite, $f ^ { \prime }$ is not surjective; hence the set $C - f ^ { \prime } ( \{ 1 , \ldots , n - 1 \} )$ is not empty, and $f ( n )$ is well defined. Note that this definition is an acceptable one; it does not define f in terms of itself but in terms of the given function $\pmb { f ^ { \prime } }$

It is easy to check that f satisfies (\*） for all i in its domain. The function f satisfies (\*） for $i \le n - 1$ because it equals $f ^ { \prime }$ there.And f satisfies (\*) for $i = n$ because,by definition,

$$
f ( n ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t } } { \mathrm { e l e m e n t ~ o f } } \left[ C - f ^ { \prime } ( \left\{ 1 , \dots , n - 1 \right\} ) \right]
$$

$$
\operatorname { a n d } f ^ { \prime } ( \{ 1 , \ . . , n - 1 \} ) = f ( \{ 1 , . . . , n - 1 \} ) .
$$

Lemma 8.2. Suppose that $f \ . \ \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} \  \ C$ and $g : \{ 1 , \ldots , m \} \to C$ both satisfy(\*） for all i in their respective domains.Then $f ( i ) = g ( i )$ foralliin both domains.

Proof.Suppose not. Let i be the smallest integer for which $f ( i ) \neq g ( i )$ . The integeri is not l,because

$$
f ( 1 ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } C = g ( 1 ) ,
$$

by (\*). Now for all $j < i$ , we have $f ( j ) = g ( j )$ .Because f and g satisfy (\*),

$$
f ( i ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } [ C - f ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) ] ,
$$

$$
g ( i ) = \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f } \ [ C - g ( \{ 1 , \ . \ . , i - 1 \} ) ] .
$$

Since $f ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) = g ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} )$ , we have $f ( i ) = g ( i )$ ,contrary to the choice of i.

Theorem 8.3. There exists a unique function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to C$ satisfying(\*） for all $i \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

Proof.By Lemma 8.1,there exists for each n a function that maps $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ into C and satisfies(\*） for all i in its domain. Given n,Lemma 8.2 shows that this function is unique; two such functions having the same domain must be equal. Let $f _ { n }$ ： $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \} \to C$ denote this unique function.

Now comes the crucial step. We define a function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to C$ by defining its rule to be the union $U$ of the rules of the functions $f _ { n }$ . The rule for $f _ { n }$ is a subset of $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \} \times C$ therefore,Uisasubsetof $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times C$ .We must show that U is the rule for a function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to C$

That is,we must show that each element i of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ appears as the first coordinate of exactly one element of U.This is easy. The integer i lies in the domain of $f _ { n }$ if and only if $n > i$ .Therefore,the set of elements of U of which i is the first coordinate is precisely the set of all pairs of the form $( i , f _ { n } ( i ) )$ ,for $n \geq i$ . Now Lemma 8.2 tells us that $f _ { n } ( i ) = f _ { m } ( i ) \mathrm { i f } n , m \geq i$ 、Therefore,all these elements of $U$ are equal; that is, there is only one element of U that has ias its first coordinate.

To show that h satisfies (\*) is also easy; it is a consequence of the following facts:

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { h ( i ) = f _ { n } ( i ) \qquad \mathrm { f o r } i \leq n , } \\ & { f _ { n } \mathrm { s a t i s f i e s } ( \ast ) \mathrm { f o r a l l } i \mathrm { i n ~ u t s ~ d o m a n } . } \end{array}
$$

The proof of uniqueness is a copy of the proof of Lemma 8.2.

Now we formulate the general principle of recursive definition. There are no new ideas involved in its proof,so we leave it as an exercise.

Theorem 8.4 (Principle of recursive definition). Let A be a set; let ${ \pmb a } _ { 0 }$ be an element of A. Suppose $\rho$ is a function that assigns,to each function f mapping a nonempty section of the positive integers into A,an element of A.Then there exists a unique function

$$
h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A
$$

such that

(\*）

$$
\begin{array} { l } { h ( 1 ) = a _ { 0 } , } \\ { h ( i ) = \rho ( h | \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) \quad \ f o \ r i > 1 . } \end{array}
$$

The formula (\*） is called a recursion formula for h. It specifies $h ( 1 )$ ,and it expresses the value of h at $i > 1$ in terms of the values of h for positive integers less than i.

EXAMPLE l．Let us show that Theorem 8.3 is a special case of this theorem. Given the infinite subset $c$ d $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,let $\pmb { a } _ { 0 }$ be the smallest element of $c .$ and define $\pmb { \rho }$ by the equation

$$
\rho ( f ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t } } { \mathrm { e l e m e n t } } 0 { \mathrm { f } } \ [ C - ( { \mathrm { i m a g e } } \ { \mathrm { s e t } } { \mathrm { o f } } \ f ) ] .
$$

Because C is infinite and f is a functuon mapping a finite set into C,the image set of f is not all of C,therefore,p is well defined.By Theorem 8.4 there exists a function $h \cdot \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to$ C such that $h ( 1 ) = a _ { 0 }$ and for $i > 1$

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { h ( i ) = \rho ( h | \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) } \\ & { \qquad = \mathrm { s m a l l e s t } \mathrm { e l e m e n t o f } [ C - ( \mathrm { i m a g e } \mathrm { s e t } \mathrm { o f } h | \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) ] } \\ & { \qquad = \mathrm { s m a l l e s t } \mathrm { e l e m e n t o f } [ C - h ( \{ 1 \dots , i - 1 \} ) ] , } \end{array}
$$

as desired.

EXAMPLE 2.Given $\textbf { \em a } \in \mathbb { R }$ ，we“defined"a",in the exercises of ${ \mathfrak { s } } 4 .$ by the recursion formula

$$
\begin{array} { l } { a ^ { 1 } = a , } \\ { a ^ { n } = a ^ { n - 1 } \cdot a } \end{array}
$$

Wewish to apply Theorem 8.4 to definea function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R }$ ngorously such that $h ( n ) = a ^ { n }$ .To apply this theorem,let ao denote the element a of R,and define $\pmb { \rho }$ by the equation $\rho ( f ) = f ( m ) \cdot a$ where $f \cdot \{ 1 , \dots , m \}  \mathbb { R }$ Then there exists a unique function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R }$ such that

$$
\begin{array} { l } { h ( 1 ) = a _ { 0 } , } \\ { h ( i ) = \rho ( h | \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) \quad \ \mathrm { f o r } i > 1 . } \end{array}
$$

This means that $h ( 1 ) = a$ ,and h(i)= h(i- l)·a fori > 1. If we denote h(i) by $\mathbf { \Delta } _ { \mathbf { { a } ^ { i } } }$ we have

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { a ^ { 1 } = a , } } \\ { { a ^ { i } = a ^ { i - 1 } \cdot a , } } \end{array}
$$

as desired.

## Exercises

1. Let $( b _ { 1 } , b _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ be an infinite sequence of real numbers. The sum $\sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k }$ is defined by induction as follows :

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { \displaystyle \sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k } = b _ { 1 } } } & { { ~ \mathrm { f o r } ~ n = 1 , \medskip } } \\ { { \displaystyle \sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k } = ( \sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { n - 1 } b _ { k } ) + b _ { n } } } & { { ~ \mathrm { f o r } ~ n > 1 . } } \end{array}
$$

Let A be the set of real numbers; choose $\rho$ so that Theorem 8.4 applies to define this sum rigorously. We sometimes denote the sum $\sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k }$ by the symbol $b _ { 1 } + b _ { 2 } + \cdot \cdot + b _ { n }$

2.Let $( b _ { 1 } , b _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ be an infinite sequence of real numbers. We define the product $\prod _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k }$ by the equations

$$
\begin{array} { l } { \displaystyle \prod _ { k = 1 } ^ { 1 } b _ { k } = b _ { 1 } , } \\ { \displaystyle \prod _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k } = ( \prod _ { k = 1 } ^ { n - 1 } b _ { k } ) \cdot b _ { n } \qquad \mathrm { f o r } n > 1 . } \end{array}
$$

Use Theorem 8.4 to define this product rigorously. We sometimes denote the product $\prod _ { k = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { k }$ by the symbol $b _ { 1 } b _ { 2 } \dots b _ { n }$

3.Obtain the definitions of $\pmb { a } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ and n! for $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ as special cases of Exercise 2.

4.The Fibonacci numbers of number theory are defined recursively by the formula

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \lambda _ { 1 } = \lambda _ { 2 } = 1 , } } \\ { { \lambda _ { n } = \lambda _ { n - 1 } + \lambda _ { n - 2 } \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } n > 2 . } } \end{array}
$$

Define them rigorously by use of Theorem 8.4.

5. Show that there is a unique function h : $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R } _ { + }$ satisfying the formula

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { h ( 1 ) = 3 , } } & { { } } \\ { { } } & { { h ( i ) = [ h ( i - 1 ) + 1 ] ^ { 1 / 2 } \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } i > 1 . } } \end{array}
$$

6.(a）Show that there is no function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R } _ { + }$ satisfying the formula

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { h ( 1 ) = 3 , } } & { { } } \\ { { h ( i ) = [ h ( i - 1 ) - 1 ] ^ { 1 / 2 } } } & { { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } i > 1 . } } \end{array}
$$

Explain why this example does not violate the principle of recursive definition.

(b)Consider the recursion formula

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { h ( 1 ) = 3 , } \\ & { h ( i ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { [ h ( i - 1 ) - 1 ] ^ { 1 / 2 } } & { \mathrm { i f } h ( i - 1 ) > 1 } \\ { 5 } & { \mathrm { i f } h ( i - 1 ) \le 1 } \end{array} \right\} \qquad \mathrm { f o r } i > 1 . } \end{array}
$$

Show that there exists a unique function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R } _ { + }$ satisfying this formula.

7. Prove Theorem 8.4.

8.Verify the following version of the principle of recursive definition:Let A be a set. Let $\rho$ be a function assigning,to every function f mapping a section $S _ { n }$ of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ into A,an element $\rho ( f )$ of A.Then there is a unique function h ： $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ such that $\begin{array} { r } { h ( n ) = \rho ( h | S _ { n } ) } \end{array}$ for each $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ·

## \$9Infinite Sets and the Axiom of Choice

We have already obtained several criteria for a set to be infinite. We know,for instance, that a set A is infinite if it has a countably infinite subset,or if there is a bijection of A with a proper subset of itself. It turns out that either of these properties is sufficient to characterize infinite sets.This we shall now prove. The proof will lead us into a discussion of a point of logic we have not yet mentioned-the axiom of choice.

Theorem 9.1. Let A be a set. The following statements about A are equivalent:

(1）There exists an injective function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$

(2）There exists a bijection of A with a proper subset of itself.

(3)A is infinite.

Proof.We prove the implications $( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 2 ) \Rightarrow ( 3 ) \Rightarrow ( 1 )$ . To prove that $( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 2 )$ we assume there is an injective function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ Let the image set $f ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ be denoted by $\pmb { B } ;$ and let $f ( n )$ be denoted by $a _ { n }$ .Because f is injective, $a _ { n } \neq a _ { m }$ if $n \neq m$ Define

$$
g : A \longrightarrow A - \{ a _ { 1 } \}
$$

by the equations

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { g ( a _ { n } ) = a _ { n + 1 } \quad } & { { } \mathrm { f o r } a _ { n } \in B , } \\ { g ( x ) = x \quad } & { { } \mathrm { f o r } x \in A - B . } \end{array}
$$

The map $\pmb { \mathscr { g } }$ is indicated schematically in Figure 9.l;one checks easily that it is a bijection.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 9.1

The implication $( 2 ) \Rightarrow ( 3 )$ is just the contrapositive of Corollary 6.3,so it has already been proved.To prove that $( 3 ) \ \Rightarrow \ ( 1 )$ ，we assume that A is infinite and construct "by induction”an injective function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$

First,since the set A is not empty,we can choose a point ${ \pmb a } _ { \mathrm { l } }$ of A; define $f ( 1 )$ to be the point so chosen.

Then,assuming that we have defined $f ( 1 ) , \ldots , f ( n - 1 )$ ,we wish to define $f ( n )$ The set $A - f ( \{ 1 , \dotsc , n - 1 \} )$ is not empty; for if it were empty, the map $f : \{ 1 , \ldots , n -$ $1 \}  A$ would be a surjection and A would be finite. Hence,we can choose an

element of the set $A - f ( \{ 1 , \dotsc , n - 1 \} )$ and define $f ( n )$ to be this element.“Using the induction principle",we have defined f for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

It is easy to see that f is injective.For suppose that $m \textless n$ Then $f ( m )$ belongs to the set $f ( \{ 1 , \dots , n - 1 \} )$ ,whereas $f ( n )$ ,by definition,does not.Therefore, $f ( n ) \neq$ $f ( m )$ □

Let us try to reformulate this “induction”proof more carefully,so as to make explicit our use of the principle of recursive definition.

Given the infinite set A,we attempt to define $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ recursively by the formula

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { f ( 1 ) = a _ { 1 } , } } \\ { { \mathrm { ~ } f ( i ) = \mathrm { a n ~ a r b i t r a r y ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f } \left[ A - f ( \{ 1 , . . . , i - 1 \} ) \right] \mathrm { ~ f o r } i > 1 . } } \end{array}\tag{*}
$$

But this is not an acceptable recursion formula at all! For it does not define f(i) uniquely in terms of $f | \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \}$

In this respect this formula differs notably from the recursion formula we considered in proving Lemma 7.2. There we had an infinite subset C of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,and we defined h by the formula

h(1)= smallest element of C,

$$
h ( i ) = { \mathrm { s m a l l e s t ~ e l e m e n t ~ o f ~ } } [ C - h ( \{ 1 , \ldots , i - 1 \} ) ] \qquad { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } i > 1 .
$$

This formula does define h(i) uniquely in terms of $h | \{ 1 , \ldots , i - 1 \}$

Another way of seeing that (\*） is not an acceptable recursion formula is to note that if it were,the principle of recursive definition would imply that there is a unique function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to$ A satisfying (\*). But by no stretch of the imagination does (\*) specifyf uniquely.In fact,this“definition"off involves infinitely many arbitrary choices.

What we are saying is that the proof we have given for Theorem 9.1 is not actually a proof. Indeed,on the basis of the properties of set theory we have discussed up to now, it is not possible to prove this theorem. Something more is needed.

Previously, we described certain definite allowable methods for specifying sets:

(1）Defining aset by listing its elements,or by taking a given set A and specifying a subset B of it by giving aproperty that the elements of B are to satisfy.

(2）Taking unions or intersections of the elements of a given collection of sets,or taking the difference of two sets.

(3） Taking the set of all subsets of a given set.

(4） Taking cartesian products of sets.

Now the rule for the function f is really a set: a subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times A$ .Therefore,to prove the existence of the function f,we must construct the appropriate subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times A$ using the allowed methods for forming sets.The methods already given simply are not adequate for this purpose. We need a new way of asserting the existence of a set. So, we add to the list of allowed methods of forming sets the following:

Axiom of choice.Given a collection A of disjoint nonempty sets,there exists a set C consisting of exactly one element from each element of $\mathbf { \nabla } \mathcal { A } .$ thatis,a set C such that C is contained in the union of the elements of A,and for each $A \in { \mathcal { A } }$ ,the set Cn A contains a single element.

The set C can be thought of as having been obtained by choosing one element from each of the sets in A.

The axiom of choice certainly seems an innocent-enough assertion. And,in fact, most mathematicians today accept it as part of the set theory on which they base their mathematics.But in years past a good deal of controversy raged around this particular assertion concerning set theory,for there are theorems one can prove with its aid that some mathematicians were reluctant to accept. One such is the well-ordering theorem, which we shall discuss shortly.For the present we shall simply use the choice axiom to clear up the difficulty we mentioned in the preceding proof.First, we prove an easy consequence of the axiom of choice:

Lemma 9.2 (Existence of a choice function). Given a collection $\pmb { \mathcal { B } }$ of nonempty sets (not necessarily disjoint),there exists a function

$$
c : { \mathcal { B } } \longrightarrow \bigcup _ { B \in { \mathcal { B } } } B
$$

such that c(B) is an element of B,for each $\pmb { { \cal B } } \in \mathcal { B }$

The function c is called a choice function for the collection B.

The difference between this lemma and the axiom of choice is that in this lemma the sets of the collection B are not required to be disjoint. For example,one can allow B to be the collection of uall nonempty subsets of a given set.

Proof of the lemma.Given an element B of ${ \pmb { \mathcal { B } } } .$ we define a set $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ as follows\*

$$
B ^ { \prime } = \{ ( B , x ) \mid x \in B \} .
$$

That is, $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ is the collection of allordered pairs,where the first coordinate of the ordered pair is the set $\pmb { B } ,$ ,and the second coordinate is an element of B.The set $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ is a subset of the cartesian product

$$
{ \mathcal { B } } \times \bigcup _ { B \in { \mathcal { B } } } B .
$$

Because B contains at least one element x,the set $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ contains at least the element $( B , x )$ ,so it is nonempty.

Now we claim that if $\pmb { B } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb B } _ { 2 }$ are two different sets in ${ \pmb { \mathcal { B } } } .$ then the corresponding sets $\pmb { B } _ { 1 } ^ { \prime }$ and ${ \pmb B } _ { 2 } ^ { \prime }$ are disjoint.For the typical element of $\pmb { B } _ { 1 } ^ { \prime }$ is a pair of the form $( B _ { 1 } , x _ { 1 } )$ and the typical element of ${ \pmb B } _ { 2 } ^ { \prime }$ is a pair of the form $( B _ { 2 } , x _ { 2 } )$ . No two such elements can be equal, for their first coordinates are different.Now let us form the collection

$$
\mathcal { C } = \{ B ^ { \prime } \mid B \in \mathcal { B } \} ;
$$

it is a collection of disjoint nonempty subsets of

$$
{ \mathcal { B } } \times \bigcup _ { B \in { \mathcal { B } } } B .
$$

By the choice axiom,there exists a set c consisting of exactly one element from each element of C. Our claim is that c is the rule for the desired choice function.

In the first place,c is a subset of

$$
{ \mathcal { B } } \times \bigcup _ { B \in { \mathcal { B } } } B .
$$

In the second place,c contains exactly one element from each set $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ therefore,for each $B \in { \mathcal { B } }$ ,the set c contains exactly one ordered pair $( B , x )$ whose first coordinate Is B.Thus c is indeed the rule for a function from the collection $\pmb { \mathcal { B } }$ to the set $\cup _ { B \in \mathcal { B } } B$ Finally, if $( B , x ) \in c$ ,then x belongs to B,so that $c ( B ) \in B$ as desired.

A second proof of Theorem 9.I.Using this lemma, one can make the proof of Theorem 9.l more precise.Given the infinite set A,we wish to construct an injective function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ .Let us form the collection B of all nonempty subsets of A. The lemma just proved asserts the existence of a choice function for ${ \mathcal { B } } ;$ that is,a function

$$
c : { \mathcal { B } } \longrightarrow \bigcup _ { B \in { \mathcal { B } } } B = A
$$

such that $c ( B ) \in B$ for each $B \in { \mathcal { B } }$ .Let us now define a function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ by the recursion formula

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { f ( 1 ) = c ( A ) , } } \\ { { f ( i ) = c ( A - f ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} ) ) \quad \ \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } i > 1 . } } \end{array}\tag{*}
$$

Because Ais infinite,the set $A - f ( \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \} )$ is nonempty;therefore,the rght side of this equation makes sense.Since this formula defines $\pmb { f } ( i )$ uniquely in terms of $f | \{ 1 , \dots , i - 1 \}$ ,the principle of recursive definition applies.We conclude that there exists a unique function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ satisfying (\*） for all $i \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . Injectivity of f follows as before. □

Having emphasized that in order to construct a proof of Theorem 9.l that is logically correct, one must make specific use of a choice function,we now backtrack and admit that in practice most mathematicians do no such thing．They go on with no qualms giving proofs like our first version,proofs that involve an infinite number of arbitrary choices.They know that they are really using the choice axiom;and they know that if it were necessary, they could put their proofs into a logically more satisfactory form by introducing a choice function specifically. But usually they do not bother.

And neither will we.You will find few further specific uses of a choice function in this book; we shallintroduce a choice function only when the proof would become confusing without it. But there will be many proofs in which we make an infinite number of arbitrary choices,and in each such case we will actually be using the choice axiom implicitly.

Now we must confess that in an earlier section of this book there is a proof in which we constructed a certain function by makingan infinite number of arbitrary choices.And we slipped that proof in without even mentioning the choice axiom. Our apologies for the deception.We leave it to you to ferret out which proof it was!

Let us make one final comment on the choice axiom. There are two forms of this axiom. One can be called the finite axiom ofchoice; it asserts that given a finite collection A of disjoint nonempty sets,there exists a set C consisting of exactly one element from each element of A.One needs this weak form of the choice axiom all the time;we have used it freely in the preceding sections with no comment. No mathematician has any qualms about the finite choice axiom;it is part of everyone's set theory. Said differently,no one has qualms about a proof that involves only finitely many arbitrarychoices.

The stronger form of the axiom of choice,the one that applies to an arbitrary collection A of nonempty sets,is the one that is properly called “the axiom of choice." When a mathematician wrtes,“This proof depends on the choice axiom,"it is invariably this stronger form of the axiom that is meant.

## Exercises

1. Define an injective map $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to X ^ { \omega }$ ,where X is the two-element set {0,1), without using the choice axiom.

2.Find if possible a choice function for each of the following collections,without using the choice axiom:

(a） The collection A of nonempty subsets of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(b） The collection B of nonempty subsets of $\mathbb { Z }$

(c） The collection C of nonempty subsets of the rational numbers Q.

(d）The collection D of nonempty subsets of $X ^ { \omega }$ ,where $X = \{ 0 , 1 \}$

3.Suppose that A is aset and $\{ f _ { n } \} _ { n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { * } }$ isa given indexed familyof injective functions

$$
f _ { n } : \{ 1 , \dots , n \} \longrightarrow A .
$$

Show that A is infinite. Can you define an injective function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to A$ without using the choice axiom?

4. There was a theorem in §7 whose proof involved an infinite number of arbitrary choices.Which one was it? Rewrite the proof so as to make explicit the use of the choice axiom. (Several of the earlier exercises have used the choice axiom also.)

5.(a)Use the choice axiom to show that if $f : A  B$ is surjective,then f has a right inverse $h \cdot B  A$

(b) Show that if $f : A  B$ is injective and A is not empty,then f has a left inverse.Is the axiom of choice needed?

6.Most of the famous paradoxes of naive set theory are associated in some way or other with the concept of the"set of all sets."None of the rules we have given for forming sets allows us to consider such a set. And for good reason-the concept itself is self-contradictory. For suppose that A denotes the"set of allsets."

(a） Show that $\mathcal { P } ( \mathcal { A } ) \subset \mathcal { A } \backslash$ ：derive a contradiction.

(b) (Russell's paradox.）Let B be the subset of A consisting of allsets that are not elements of themselves;

$$
{ \mathcal { B } } = \{ A \mid A \in { \mathcal { A } } { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } A \notin A \} .
$$

(Of course,there may be no set A such that $A \in A$ if such is the case,then $\mathscr { B } = \mathcal { A } . )$ Is B an element of itself or not?

7.Let A and B be two nonempty sets. If there is an injection of B into A, but no injection of A into B,we say that A has greater cardinality than B.

(a)Conclude from Theorem 9.1 that every uncountable set has greater cardinality than $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(b) Show that if A has greater cardinality than B,and B has greater cardinality than C,then A has greater cardinality than C.

(c） Find a sequence $A _ { 1 } , A _ { 2 } , \dotsc$ of infinite sets,such that for each $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,the set $A _ { n + 1 }$ has greater cardinality than $A _ { n }$

(d） Find a set that for every n has cardinality greater than $A _ { n }$

\*8. Show that $\mathcal { P } ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ and R have the same cardinality.[Hint: You may use the fact that every real number has a decimal expansion,which is unique if expansions that end in an infinite string of 9's are forbidden.]

Afamous conjecture of set theory,called the continuum hypothesis,asserts that there exists no set having greater cardinality than $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ and lesser cardinality than R. The generalized continuum hypothesis asserts that,given the infinite set A,there is no set having greater cardinality than A and lesser cardinality than ${ \mathcal { P } } ( A )$ .Surprisingly enough,both of these assertions have been shown to be independent of the usual axioms for set theory. For a readable expository account,see [Sm].

## \$10Well-Ordered Sets

One of the useful properties of the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ of positive integers is the fact that each of its nonempty subsets has a smallest element. Generalizing this property leads to the concept of a well-ordered set.