Lemma 3.1. Two equivalence classes E and $E ^ { \prime }$ are either disjoint or equal.

Proof.Let E be the equivalence class determined by x,and let $E ^ { \prime }$ be the equivalence class determined by $\pmb { x } ^ { \prime }$ Suppose that $E \cap E ^ { \prime }$ is not empty; let y be a point of $E \cap E ^ { \prime }$ See Figure 3.1.We show that $E = E ^ { \prime }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 3.1

By definition,we have $y \sim x$ and $\boldsymbol { y } \sim \boldsymbol { x } ^ { \prime }$ .Symmetry allows us to conclude that $x \sim y$ and $\mathbf { y } \sim \pmb { x } ^ { \prime } .$ ：from transitivity it follows that $\pmb { x } \sim \pmb { x } ^ { \prime }$ If now w is any point of E, we have $w \sim x$ by definition; it follows from another application of transitivity that $w \sim x ^ { \prime }$ .We conclude that $E \subset E ^ { \prime }$

The symmetry of the situation allows us to conclude that $E ^ { \prime } \subset E$ as well, so that $E = E ^ { \prime }$ ■

Given an equivalence relation on a set A,let us denote by ε the collection of all the equivalence classes determined by this relation. The preceding lemma shows that distinct elements of & are disjoint.Furthermore,the union of the elements of & equals all of A because every element of A belongs to an equivalence class. The collection ε is a particular example of what is called a partition of A:

Definition.A partition of a set A is a collection of disjoint nonempty subsets of A whose union is all of A.

Studying equivalence relations on a set A and studying partitions of A are really the same thing. Given any partition D of A,there is exactly one equivalence relation on A from which it is derived.

The proof is not difficult. To show that the partition D comes from some equivalence relation,let us define a relation Con A by setting xCy if x and y belong to the same element of D.Symmetry of C is obvious; reflexivity follows from the fact that the union of the elements of $\mathcal { D }$ equals all of A; transitivity follows from the fact that distinct elements of $\mathcal { D }$ are disjoint It is simple to check that the collection of equivalence classes determined by C is precisely the collection D.

To show there is only one such equivalence relation, suppose that $c _ { 1 }$ and C2 are $c _ { 2 }$ two equivalence relations on A that give rise to the same collection of equivalence classes $\mathcal { D }$ Given $x \in A$ ，we show that $y C _ { 1 } x$ if and only if $y C _ { 2 } x$ , from which we conclude that $c _ { 1 } = c _ { 2 }$ . Let $E _ { 1 }$ be the equivalence class determined by x relative to the relation $c _ { 1 }$ let $E _ { 2 }$ be the equivalence class determined by x relative to the relation $c _ { 2 }$ . Then $E _ { \mathrm { l } }$ is an element of $\mathcal { D }$ ,so that it must equal the unique element D of $\mathcal { D }$ that contains x. Similarly、 $E _ { 2 }$ must equal D. Now by definition, $E _ { 1 }$ consists of all y such that $y C _ { 1 } x ;$ and $E _ { 2 }$ consists of all y such that $y C _ { 2 } x$ . Since $E _ { 1 } = D = E _ { 2 }$ ,our result is proved.

EXAMPLE3 Define two points in the plane to be equivalent if they lie at the same distance from the ongin.Reflexivity,symmetry,and transitivity hold trivially.The collection ε of equivaience classes consists of ali circles centered at the ongin,along with the set consisting of the origin alone.

EXAMPLE4 Define two points of the plane to be equivalent if they have the same y-coordinate. The collection of equivalence classes Is the collection of all straight lines in the plane parallel to the x-axis.

EXAMPLE 5．Let L be the collection of all straight lines in the plane parallel to the line $y = - x$ .ThenL is a partition of the piane,since each point lies on exactly one such line. The parttion L comes from the equivalence relation on the plane that declares the points (xo.yo）and $( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )$ to be equivalent if $x _ { 0 } + y _ { 0 } = x _ { 1 } + y _ { 1 }$

EXAMPLE6Let $\mathcal { L } ^ { \prime }$ be the collection of all straight lines in the plane. Then $\mathcal { L } ^ { \prime }$ is not a partition of the plane,for distinct elements of $\mathcal { L } ^ { \prime }$ are not necessarily disjoint;two lines may intersect without being equal.

## Order Relations

A relation C on a set A is called an order relation (or a simple order, or a linear order) if it has the following properties:

(1）(Comparability) For every x and y in A for which $x \neq y$ ,either $_ { x } C y$ or $y C x$

(2）(Nonreflexivity) For no x in A does the relation $\pmb { x } \pmb { C } \pmb { x }$ hold.

(3）(Transitivity) If $x C y$ and $_ { y C z }$ then $_ { x } C z$

Note that property(1) does not by itself exclude the possibility that for some pair of elements x andyof A,both the relations $x C y$ and $y C x$ hold (since“or"means “one or the other,or both").But properties (2) and(3) combined do exclude this possibility; for if both $x C y$ and $_ { y C x }$ held,transitivity would imply that $_ { x C x }$ ,contradicting nonrefiexivity.

EXAMPLE 7.Consider the relation on the real line consisting of all pairs $( x , y )$ of real numbers such that $\ x \ < \ y .$ It is an order relation,calied the“usual order relation,"on the real line.A less familiar order relation on the real line is the following:Define $_ { x \pmb { C } y }$ if $\ x ^ { 2 } < y ^ { 2 }$ ,orif $x ^ { 2 } = y ^ { 2 }$ and $x < y$ .You can check that this is an order relation.

EXAMPLE 8．Consider again the relationships among people given in Example i.The blood relation B satisfies none of the properties of an order relation,and the sibling relation S satisfies only (3). The descendant relation D does somewhat better,for it satisfies both (2) and (3);however,comparability stil fails.Relations that satisfy (2)and (3) occur often enough in mathematics to be given a special name.They are cailed strict partial order reiations;we shall consider them later (see §1l).

As the tilde,\~,is the generic symbol for an equivalence relation,the “less than" symbol,<,is commonly used to denote an order relation. Stated in this not ation,the properties of an order relation become

(1）If $x \neq y .$ ,then either $x < y \circ \mathfrak { r } \ y < x$

(2)If $x < y .$ then $x \neq y$

(3) If $x < y$ and $y < z$ then $x < z$

We shall use the notation $x \leq y$ to stand for the statement “either $x < y \circ \mathbf { r } x = y ^ { \mathfrak { w } }$ 1 and we shall use the notation $y \ > \ x$ to stand for the statement $" x \ < \ y . "$ We write $x < y < z$ to mean $\ " x < y$ and $y < z .$

Definition.If X is a set and<is an order relation on X,and if $a < b ,$ we use the notation (a,b) to denote the set

$$
\{ x \mid a < x < b \} ;
$$

it is called an open interval in X. If this set is empty, we call a the immediate predecessor of b,and we call b the immediate successor of a.

Definition. Suppose that A and B are two sets with order relations $< _ { A }$ and $< \pmb { \mathscr { B } }$ respectively. We say that A and B have the same order type if there is a bijective correspondence between them that preserves order; that is,if there exists a bijective function $f : A  B$ such that

$$
a _ { 1 } < _ { A } a _ { 2 } \Longrightarrow f ( a _ { 1 } ) < _ { B } f ( a _ { 2 } ) .
$$

EXAMPLE 9．The interval (-i,1) of real numbers has the same order type as the set R of real numbers itself, for the function f:（-1,I)→ R given by

$$
f ( x ) = { \frac { x } { 1 - x ^ { 2 } } }
$$

is an order-preserving bijective correspondence,as you can check. It is pictured in Figure 3.2.

EXAMPLE 10．The subset $A = \{ 0 \} \cup ( 1 , 2 )$ of R has the same order type as the subset

$$
\{ 0 , 1 \} = \{ x \mid 0 \leq x < 1 \}
$$

of R. The function f. A→ [0.1) defined by

$$
\begin{array} { l } { f ( 0 ) = 0 , } \\ { f ( x ) = x - 1 \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } x \in \left( \mathbb { I } , 2 \right) } \end{array}
$$

is the required order-preserving correspondence.

One interesting way of defining an order relation, which wil be useful to us later in dealing with some examples,is the following:

<!-- image-->  
Figure 3.2

Definition. Suppose that A and B are two sets with order relations $< _ { A }$ and $< \pmb { \mathscr { B } }$ respectively. Define an order relation<on $A \times B$ by defining

$$
a _ { 1 } \times b _ { 1 } < a _ { 2 } \times b _ { 2 }
$$

if $a _ { 1 } < _ { A } ~ a _ { 2 }$ ,or if ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 } = { \pmb a } _ { 2 }$ and $b _ { 1 } < _ { B } b _ { 2 }$ . It is called the dictionary order relation on $A \times B$

Checking that this is an order relation involves looking at several separate cases; we leave it to you.

The reason for the choice of terminology is fairly evident.The rule defining < is the same as the rule used to order the words in the dictionary. Given two words,one compares their first letters and orders the words according to the order in which their first letters appear in the alphabet. If the first letters are the same,one compares their second letters and orders accordingly. And so on.

EXAMPLE l1．Consider the dictionary order on the plane $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ In this order, the point $\pmb { p }$ is less than every point lying above it on the vertical line through p,and $\pmb { p }$ is less than every point to the right of this vertical line.

EXAMPLE12Consider the set [O,1) ofreal numbers and the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ of positive integers, both in their usual orders; give $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \{ 0 , 1 \}$ the dictionary order.This set has the same order type as the set of nonnegative reals;the function

$$
f ( n \times t ) = n + t - 1
$$

is the required bijective order-preserving correspondence．On the other hand,the set $\left\{ 0 , 1 \right\} \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ inthe dictionary orderhas quiteadifferent order type;for example,every element of this ordered set has an immediate successor.These sets are pictured in Figure 3.3.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 3.3

One of the properties of the real numbers that you may have seen before is the "least upper bound property." One can define this property for an arbitrary ordered set. First, we need some preliminary definitions.

Suppose that A is a set ordered by the relation $<$ Let $A _ { 0 }$ be a subset of A.We say that the element b is the largest element of $A _ { 0 }$ if $b \in { \cal A } _ { 0 }$ and if $x \leq b$ for every $\pmb { x } \in { \pmb { A } } _ { 0 }$ Similarly,we say that a is the smallest element of $A _ { 0 }$ if $a \in A _ { 0 }$ and if $a \leq x$ for every $\textstyle x \in A _ { 0 }$ . It is easy to see that a set has at most one largest element and at most one smallest element.

We say that the subset $A _ { 0 }$ of A is bounded above if there is an element b of A such that $x \leq b$ for every $x \in A _ { 0 } ;$ the element b is called an upper bound for $A _ { 0 }$ If the set of all upper bounds for $A _ { 0 }$ has a smallest element, that element is called the least upper bound, or the supremum, of $A _ { 0 }$ . It is denoted by sup $\pmb { A } _ { 0 } ;$ it may or may not belong to $A _ { 0 }$ .If it does,it is the largest element of $A _ { 0 }$

Similarly,Ao is bounded below if there is an element a of A such that $a \leq x$ for every $\chi \in A _ { 0 } ;$ the element a is called a lower bound for $A _ { 0 }$ . If the set of all lower bounds for $A _ { 0 }$ has a largest element, that element is called the greatest lower bound, or the infimum, of $A _ { 0 }$ .It is denoted by inf $A _ { 0 }$ ,it may or may not belong to $A _ { 0 }$ If it does,it is the smallest element of $A _ { 0 }$

Now we can define the least upper bound property.

Definition. An ordered set A is said to have the least upper bound property if every nonempty subset $A _ { 0 }$ of A that is bounded above has a least upper bound. Analogously, the set A is said to have the greatest lower bound property if every nonempty subset $A _ { 0 }$ of A that is bounded below has a greatest lower bound.

We leave it to the exercises to show that A has the least upper bound property if and only if it has the greatest lower bound property.

EXAMPLE 13．Consider the set $A = ( - 1 , 1 )$ of real numbers in the usual order. $\mathbf { A } \mathbf { s } \mathbf { - }$ suming the fact that the real numbers have the least upper bound property, it foliows that the set A has the least upper bound property. For, given any subset of A having an upper bound in A,it follows that its least upper bound (in the real numbers) must be in A.For example, the subset $\{ - 1 / 2 n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ of A,though it has no largest element, does have a least upper bound in A,the number 0.

On the other hand,the set $B = ( - 1 , 0 ) \cup ( 0 , 1 )$ does not have the least upper bound property. The subset $\{ - 1 / 2 n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ of B is bounded above by any element of (O,1). but it has no least upper bound in B.

## Exercises

## Equivalence Relaiions

1. Define two points $( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } )$ and $( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )$ of the plane to be equivalent if $y _ { 0 } - x _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } =$ $y _ { 1 } - x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } .$ .Check that this is an equivalence relation and describe the equivalence classes

2.Let C be a relation on a set A. If $A _ { 0 } \subset A$ ,define the restriction of C to $A _ { 0 }$ to be the relation $C \cap ( A _ { 0 } \times A _ { 0 } )$ . Show that the restriction of an equivalence relation is an equivalence relation.

3.Here is a"proof'that every relation C that is both symmetric and transitive is also reflexive:“Since C is symmetric,aCb implies bCa.Since C is transitive, aCb and bCa together imply aCa,as desired.”Find the flaw in this argument.

4. Let $f : A  B$ be a surjective function. Let us define a relation on A by setting $a _ { 0 } \sim a _ { 1 }$ if

$$
f ( a _ { 0 } ) = f ( a _ { 1 } ) .
$$

(a） Show that this is an equivalence relation.

(b) Let $A ^ { * }$ be the set of equivalence classes. Show there is a bijective correspondence of $A ^ { * }$ with B.

5. Let S and ${ \pmb S } ^ { \prime }$ be the following subsets of the plane.

$$
S = \{ ( x , y ) \mid y = x + l { \mathrm { ~ a n d } } 0 < x < 2 \} ,
$$

$$
S ^ { \prime } = \{ ( x , y ) \mid y - x { \mathrm { ~ i s ~ a n ~ i n t e g e r } } \} .
$$

(a) Show that ${ \pmb S } ^ { \prime }$ is an equivalence relation on the real line and ${ \pmb S } ^ { \prime } \supset { \pmb S }$ .Describe the equivalence classes of ${ \pmb S } ^ { \prime }$

(b） Show that given any collection of equivalence relations on a set A,their intersection is an equivalence relation on A.

(c）Describe the equivalence relation Ton the real line that is the intersection of all equivalence relations on the real line that contain S．Describe the equivalence classes of T.

## Order Relations

6. Define a relation on the plane by setting

$$
( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } ) < ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )
$$

if either $y _ { 0 } - x _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } < y _ { 1 } - x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } , \mathrm { o r } y _ { 0 } - x _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } = y _ { 1 } - x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 }$ and $x _ { 0 } < x _ { 1 }$ . Show that this is an order relation on the plane,and descrbe it geometrically.

7. Show that the restriction of an order relation is an order relation.

8. Check that the relation defined in Example 7 is an order relation.

9.Check that the dictionary order is an order relation.

10.(a） Show that the map $f : ( - 1 , 1 ) \to \mathbb { R }$ of Example 9 is order preserving.

(b） Show that the equation $g ( y ) = 2 y / [ 1 + ( 1 + 4 y ^ { 2 } ) ^ { 1 / 2 } ]$ defines a function $g : \mathbb { R } \to ( - 1 , 1 )$ that is both a leftand anght inverse for $f .$

11. Show that an element in an ordered set has at most one immediate successor and at most one immediate predecessor. Show that a subset of an ordered set has at most one smallest element and at most one largest element.

12. Let $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ denote the set of positive integers. Consider the following order relations on $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(i） The dictionary order.

(i) $( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } ) < ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )$ if either $x _ { 0 } - y _ { 0 } < x _ { 1 } - y _ { \mathrm { l } } , \mathrm { o r } x _ { 0 } - y _ { 0 } = x _ { 1 } - y _ { \mathrm { l } }$ and $y _ { 0 } < y _ { 1 } .$

(i) $( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } ) < ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )$ if either $x _ { 0 } + y _ { 0 } < x _ { 1 } + y _ { 1 } , \mathrm { o r } x _ { 0 } + y _ { 0 } = x _ { 1 } + y _ { 1 }$ and $y _ { 0 } < y _ { 1 }$

In these order relations,whuch elements have immediate predecessors? Does the set have a smallest element? Show that all three order types are different.

## 13. Prove the following:

Theorem. If an ordered set A has the least upper bound property, then it has the greatest lower bound property.

14. If C is a relation on a set A,define a new relation Don A by leting $( b , a ) \in D$ if $( a , b ) \in C$

(a) Show that C is symmetric if and only if ${ \boldsymbol { C } } = D $

(b） Show that if C is an order relation,D is also an order relation.

(c） Prove the converse of the theorem in Exercise l3.

15. Assume that the real line has the least upper bound property.

(a） Show that the sets

$$
[ 0 , 1 ] = \{ x \mid 0 \leq x \leq 1 ] ,
$$

$$
[ 0 , 1 ) = \{ x \mid 0 \leq x < 1 \}
$$

have the least upper bound property.

(b) Does $[ 0 , 1 ] \times [ 0 , 1 ]$ in the dictionary order have the least upper bound property? What about $[ 0 , 1 ] \times [ 0 , 1 ) ?$ What about $[ 0 , 1 ) \times [ 0 , 1 ] !$

## \$4The Integers and the Real Numbers

Up to now we have been discussing what might be called the logical foundations for our study of topology—the elementary concepts of set theory. Now we turn to what we might call the mathematical foundations for our study--the integers and the real number system. We have already used them in an informal way in the examples and exercises of the preceding sections.Now we wish to deal with them more formally.

One way of establishing these foundations is to construct the real number system, using only the axioms of set theory-to build them with one's bare hands,so to speak. This way of approaching the subject takes a good deal of time and effort and is of greater logical than mathematical interest.

A second way is simply to assume a set of axioms for the real numbers and work from these axioms.In the present section,we shall sketch this approach to the real numbers.Specifically,we shall give a set of axioms for the real numbers and shall indicate how the familiar properties of real numbers and the integers are derived from them.But we shall leave most of the proofs to the exercises.If you have seen all this before,our description should refresh your memory. If not,you may want to work through the exercises in detail in order to make sure of your knowledge of the mathematical foundations.

First we need a definition from set theory.

## Definition. A binary operation on a set A is a function f mapping A × A into A.

When dealing with a binary operation f on a set A,we usually use a notation different from the standard functional notation introduced in §2. Instead of denoting the value of the function f at the point $( a , a ^ { \prime } )$ by $f ( \alpha , \alpha ^ { \prime } )$ ,we usually write the symbol for the function between the two coordinates of the point in question,writing the value of the function at $( a , a ^ { \prime } )$ as $\mathbf { \Delta } a f a ^ { \prime }$ Furthermore (just as was the case with relations), it is more common to use some symbol other than a letter to denote an operation. Symbols often used are the plus symbol +,the multiplication symbols ·and o,and the asterisk \*;however,there are many others.

## Assumption

We assume there exists aset R,called the set of real numbers,two binary operations + and · on R,called the addition and multiplication operations,respectively,and an order relation <on R,such that the following properties hold:

Algebraic Properties

(1) $( x + y ) + z = x + ( y + z ) ,$

$$
( x \cdot y ) \cdot z = x \cdot ( y \cdot z ) { \mathrm { f o r } } { \mathrm { a l l } } x , y , z { \mathrm { i n } } \mathbb { R } .
$$

(2) $x + y = y + x ,$

x ·y= y · x for all x,y in R.

(3）There exists a unique element of R called zero,denoted by O,such that $\pmb { x } + \pmb { 0 } = \pmb { x }$ for all $\pmb { x } \in \mathbb { R }$

There exists a unique element of R called one,different from O and denoted by l, such that $\pmb { x } \cdot \pmb { l } = \pmb { x }$ for all ${ \pmb x } \in \mathbb { R } .$

(4）For each x in R,there exists a unique y in R such that $x + y = 0$

For each x in R different from O,there exists a unique y in R such that $\boldsymbol x \cdot \boldsymbol y = 1$

(5) $x \cdot ( y + z ) = ( x \cdot y ) + ( x \cdot z )$ for all x, $y , z \in \mathbb { R } .$

## A Mixed Algebraic and Order Property

(6) If x >y,then $x + z > y + z .$

If x > y and $z > 0$ then $x \cdot z > y \cdot z$

## Order Properties

(7）The order relation <has the least upper bound property.

(8）If x <y,there exists an element z such that $x < z$ and $z < y$

From properties (l)-(5) follow the familiar"laws of algebra.” Given x,one denotes by-x that number y such that $x + y = 0 ;$ it is called the negative of x. One defines the subtraction operation by the formula $z - x = z + ( - x )$ . Similarly, given $x \neq 0 ,$ ,one denotes by $1 / x$ that number y such that x ·y = l; it is called the reciprocal of x.One defines the quotient $z / x$ by the formula $z / x = z \cdot ( 1 / x )$ .The usual laws of signs,and the rules for adding and multiplying fractions,follow as theorems.These laws of algebra are listed in Exercise l at the end of the section.We often denote xy simply by xy.

When one adjoins property (6)to properties (l)-(5),one can prove the usual "laws of inequalities."such as the following:

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathrm { I f } x > y \mathrm { a n d } z < 0 , \mathrm { t h e n } x \cdot z < y \cdot z . } \\ { - 1 < 0 \mathrm { a n d } 0 < \mathrm { l } . } \end{array}
$$

The laws of inequalities are listed in Exercise 2.

We define a number x to be positive if $\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { x } > 0 , } \end{array}$ and to be negative if $\texttt { \textbf { x } } < 0$ We denote the _positive reals by $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ and the nonnegative reals (for reasons to be explained later) by $\bar { \mathbb { R } } _ { + }$ .Properties (l)-(6) are familiar properties in modern algebra.Any set with two binary operations satisfying(1)-(5) is called by algebraists afield;if the feld has an order relation satisfying (6),it is called an ordered feld.

Properties (7)and (8),on the other hand,are familiar properties in topology. They involve only the order relation;any set with an order relation satisfying(7) and (8) is called by topologists a linear continuum.

Now it happens that when one adjoins to the axioms for an ordered feld [properties (l)-(6)] the axioms for a linear continuum [properties (7) and (8)], the resulting list contains some redundancies.Property (8),in particular,can be proved as a consequence of the others;given x < y one can show that $z = ( x + y ) / ( 1 + 1 )$ satisfies the requirements of (8).Therefore,in the standard treatment of the real numbers, properties (l)-(7) are taken as axioms,and property (8) becomes a theorem. We have included (8) in our list merely to emphasize the fact that it and the least upper bound property are the two crucial properties of the order relation for R. From these two properties many of the topological properties of R may be derived,as we shall see in Chapter 3.

Now there is nothing in this list as it stands to tellus what an integer is.We now define the integers,using only properties (l)-(6).

Definition.A subset A of the real numbers is said to be inductive if it contains the number1,and if for everyxin A,the number $x + 1$ is also in A.Let A be the collection of all inductive subsets of R.Then the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ of positive integers is defined by the equation

$$
\mathbb { Z } _ { + } = \bigcap _ { A \in \mathcal { A } } A .
$$

Note that the set $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ of positive real numbers is inductive,for it contains l and the statement $x > 0$ implies the statement $x + 1 > 0$ Therefore, $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \subset \mathbb { R } _ { + }$ , so the elementsof $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ are indeed positive,as the choice of terminology suggests. Indeed,one sees readily that l is the smallest element of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,because the set of all real numbers x for which $x \ge 1$ is inductive.

The basic properties of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,which follow readily from the definition,are the following:

(1) $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is inductive.

(2)(Pnnciple of induction).If A is an inductive set of positive integers,then ${ \pmb A } =$ $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

We define the set Z of integers to be the set consisting of the positive integers $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ the number O,and the negatives of the elements of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ．One proves that the sum, difference,and product of two integers are integers,but the quotient is not necessarily an integer. The set Q of quotients of integers is called the set of rational numbers.

One proves also that, given the integer n,there is no integer a such that $n < a <$ $\pm 1$

lf n is a positive integer,we use the symbol ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb n }$ to denote the set of all positive integers less than n; we callit a section of the positive integers.The set $\pmb { S } _ { 1 }$ is empty, and $S _ { n + 1 }$ denotes the set of positive integers between l and n,inclusive.We also use the notation

$$
\{ 1 , \ldots , n \} = S _ { n + 1 }
$$

for the latter set.

Now we prove two properties of the positive integers that may not be quite so familiar,but are quite useful.They may be thought of as alternative versions of the induction prnciple.

Theorem 4.1 (Well-ordering property). Every nonempty subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ has asmallest element.

Proof.We first prove that,for each $n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,the following statement holds: Every nonempty subset of $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ has a smallest element.

Let A be the set of all positive integers n for which this statement holds.Then A contains l,since if $n = 1$ ,the only nonempty subset of $\{ 1 , . . . , n \}$ is the set {1} itself. Then,supposing A contains n,we show that it contains $n + 1$ . So let C be a nonempty subset of the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n + 1 \}$ . If C consists of the single element $n + 1$ then that element is the smallest element of C.Otherwise,consider the set $C \cap \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ ,which is nonempty. Because ${ \pmb { n } } \in { \pmb { A } }$ ,this set has a smallest element, which will automatically be the smallest element of C also. Thus A is inductive,so we conclude that $A = \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ hence the statement is true for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

Now we prove the theorem. Suppose that D is a nonempty subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . Choose an element n of D. Then the set $A = D \cap \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ is nonempty,so that A has a smallest element k. The element k is automatically the smallest element of D as well.

Theorem 4.2 (Strong induction principle).Let A be a set of positive integers. Suppose that for each positve integer n,the statement $S _ { n } \subset A$ implies the statement ${ \pmb { n } } \in { \pmb { A } }$ Then $A = \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

Proof.If A does not equal all of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,let n be the smallest positive integer that is not in A. Then every positive integer less than n is in A,so that $S _ { n } \subset A$ .Our hypothesis implies that ${ \pmb { n } } \in { \pmb { A } }$ ,contrary to assumption. ■

Everything we have done up to now has used only the axioms for an ordered field, properties $( 1 ) { \ - } ( 6 )$ of the real numbers.At what point do you need (7),the least upper bound axiom?

For one thing,you need the least upper bound axiom to prove that the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ of positive integers has no upper bound in R. This is the Archimedean ordering property of the real line. To prove it,we assume that $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ has an upper bound and derive a contradiction. If $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ has an upper bound,it has a least upper bound b.There exists $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ such that $n > b - 1$ ; for otherwise, $b - 1$ would be an upper bound for $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ smaller than b.Then $n + 1 > b .$ ,contrary to the fact that b isan upper bound for $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

The least upper bound axiom is also used to prove a number of other things about R.It is used for instance to show that R has the greatest lower bound property.It is also used to prove the existence of a unique positive square root $\sqrt { x }$ for every positive real number. This fact,in turn,can be used to demonstrate the existence of real numbers that are not rational numbers; the number $\sqrt { 2 }$ is an easy example.

We use the symbol 2 to denote l +l,the symbol 3 to denote $2 + 1$ ，and so on through the standard symbols for the positive integers.It is a fact that this procedure assigns to each positive integer a unique symbol,but we never need this fact and shall not prove it.

Proofs of these properties of the integers and real numbers,along with a few other properties we shall need later, are outlined in the exercises that follow.

## Exercises

1.Prove the following "laws of algebra" for R,using only axioms (l)-(5)·

(a) $\operatorname { I f } x + y = x , \operatorname { t h e n } y = 0 .$

(b) $0 \cdot x = 0 . \ [ H i n t ; \mathrm { C o m p u t e } \ ( x + 0 ) \cdot x . ]$

(c)-0=0.

(d) $- ( - x ) = x .$

(e) $x ( - y ) = - ( x y ) = ( - x ) y .$

(f) $( - 1 ) x = - x .$

(g） $x ( y - z ) = x y - x z .$

(h) $- ( x + y ) = - x - y ; - ( x - y ) = - x + y .$

(i)If x ≠O and x·y= x,then y =1.

(j $x / x = 1 { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } } x \neq 0 .$

(k) $x / 1 = x .$

(l)x ≠0and y≠0= xy ≠0.

（m) $( 1 / y ) ( 1 / z ) = 1 / ( y z ) { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } } y , z \neq 0 .$

（m） $( x / y ) ( w / z ) = ( x w ) / ( y z ) { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } } y , z \neq 0 .$

（0） $( x / y ) + ( w / z ) = ( x z + w y ) / ( y z ) { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } } y , z \neq 0 .$

(p) $x \neq 0 \Rightarrow \mathsf { l } / x \neq 0 .$

（q） $1 / ( w / z ) = z / w \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } w , z \neq 0 .$

(r)(x/y)/(w/z)=(xz)/(yw)ify,w,z ≠0.

(s) $( a x ) / y = a ( x / y ) { \mathrm { i f ~ } } y \neq 0 .$

() $( - x ) / y = x / ( - y ) = - ( x / y ) { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } } y \neq 0 .$

2.Prove the following "laws of inequalities"for R,using axioms (1)-(6)along with the results of Exercise 1:

（a) $x > y { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } w > z \Rightarrow x + w > y + z .$

(b) $x > 0 { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } y > 0 \Rightarrow x + y > 0 { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } x \cdot y > 0 .$

(c） $x > 0 \Leftrightarrow - x < 0 .$

(d) $x > y \Leftrightarrow - x < - y .$

(e) $x > y \mathrm { ~ a n d } z < 0 \Rightarrow x z < y z .$

(f) $x \neq 0 \Rightarrow x ^ { 2 } > 0 , { \mathrm { w h e r e ~ } } x ^ { 2 } = x \cdot x .$

(g） $- 1 < 0 < 1$

(h) $x y > 0 \Leftrightarrow x$ and y are both positive or both negative.

(i) $x > 0 \Rightarrow 1 / x > 0 .$

(i) $x > y > 0 \Rightarrow 1 / x < 1 / y .$

(k) $x \ < y \Rightarrow . \mathfrak { r } \ < ( x + y ) / 2 \ < y .$

3.(a） Show that if A is a collection of inductive sets,then the intersection of the elements of A is an inductive set.

(b）Prove the basic properties (l) and (2) of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

4.(a）Prove by induction that given $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,every nonempty subset of $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ has a largest element.

(b） Explain why you cannot conclude from (a) that every nonempty subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ has a largest element.

5.Prove the following properties of Z and $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(a)a， $b \ \in \ \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \ \Rightarrow \ a + b \ \in \ \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . [Hint: Show that given $a \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ，the set $X = \{ x \mid x \in \mathbb { R } { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } a + x \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ is inductive.)

(b) $a , b \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \Rightarrow a \cdot b \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(c） Show that $a \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \Rightarrow a - 1 \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \cup \{ 0 \}$ [Hint:Let $X = \{ x \mid x \in \mathbb { R }$ and $x - 1 \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \cup \{ 0 \}$ show that Xis inductive.)

(d) $c , d \in \mathbb { Z } \Rightarrow c + d \in \mathbb { Z }$ and $c - d \in \mathbb { Z }$ [Hint.Prove itfirst for $d = 1 . ]$

(e) $c , d \in \mathbb { Z } \Rightarrow c \cdot d \in \mathbb { Z } .$

6. Let ${ \pmb a } \in \mathbb { R }$ .Define inductively

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { a ^ { 1 } = a , } } \\ { { a ^ { n + 1 } = a ^ { n } \cdot a } } \end{array}
$$

for $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ .(See ＆7 for a discussion of the process of inductive definition.) Show that for $n , m \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ and a, $\pmb { b } \in \mathbb { R }$

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { a ^ { n } a ^ { m } = a ^ { n + m } , } } \\ { { ( a ^ { n } ) ^ { m } = a ^ { n m } , } } \\ { { a ^ { m } b ^ { m } = ( a b ) ^ { m } . } } \end{array}
$$

These are called the laws of exponents [Hint: For fixed n,prove the formulas by induction on m.)

7. Let ${ \pmb { a } } \in \mathbb { R }$ and $a \neq 0$ Define $\scriptstyle a ^ { 0 } = 1$ ,and for $n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } , a ^ { - n } = 1 / a ^ { n }$ . Show that the laws of exponents hold for $a , b \neq 0$ and n, $m \in \mathbb { Z }$

8.(a) Show that R has the greatest lower bound property.

(b） Show that inf $\{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} = 0 .$

(c） Show that given a with $0 \textless a \textless 1$ ，inf $\{ a ^ { n } \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} = 0 .$ [Hint: Let $h = ( 1 - a ) / a$ ,and show that $( 1 + h ) ^ { n } \geq 1 + n h . ]$

9.(a)Show that every nonempty subset of Z that is bounded above has a largest element.

(b) $\operatorname { I f } x \notin \mathbb { Z } .$ ,show there is exactly one $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z }$ such that $n < x < n + 1$

(c）If $x - y > 1$ ,show there is at least one $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z }$ such that $y < n < x$

(d) If $y < x ,$ show there is arational number z such that $y < z < x ,$

10. Show that every positive number a has exactly one positive square root,as follows:

(a） Show that if $x > 0$ and $0 \leq h < 1$ ,then

$$
( x + h ) ^ { 2 } \leq x ^ { 2 } + h ( 2 x + 1 ) ,
$$

$$
( x - h ) ^ { 2 } \geq x ^ { 2 } - h ( 2 x ) .
$$

(b）Let $x > 0$ Show that if $x ^ { 2 } < a$ then $( x + h ) ^ { 2 } < a$ for some $h > 0 ;$ and if $x ^ { 2 } > a$ ,then $( x - h ) ^ { 2 } > a$ for some $\pmb { h } > 0$

(c）Given $a \ > \ 0$ ，let B be the set of all real numbers x such that $x ^ { 2 } < a$ Show that B is bounded above and contains at least one positive number. Let $\boldsymbol { b } = \mathsf { s u p } \boldsymbol { B }$ show that $b ^ { 2 } = a$

(d) Show that if b and c are positive and $b ^ { 2 } = c ^ { 2 }$ , then $\pmb { b = c }$

11. Given $m \in \mathbb { Z } ,$ ,we say that m is even if m $/ 2 \in \mathbb { Z } ,$ and m is odd otherwise.

(a) Show that if m is odd, $m = 2 n + 1$ for some $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } ,$ [Hint: Choose n so that $n < m / 2 < n + 1 . 1$

(b) Show that if p and q are odd,so are $p \cdot q$ and $p ^ { n }$ , for any $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(c） Show that if $a > 0$ is rational,then $a = m / n$ for some $m , n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ where not both m and n are even. [Hint: Let n be the smallest element of the set {x $| x \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ and $x \cdot a \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } | . |$

(d) Theorem. $\sqrt { 2 }$ is irrational.

## \$5Cartesian Products

We have already defined what we mean by the cartesian product $A \times B$ of two sets.   
Now we introduce more general cartesian products.

Definition. Let A be a nonempty collection of sets. An indexing function for A is a surjective function f from some set J,called the index set,to A. The collection A, together with the indexing function f,is called an indexed family of sets.Given $\textbf { \em a } \in \textbf { \em J }$ ，we shall denote the set $f ( \pmb { \alpha } )$ by the symbol $\pmb { A _ { \alpha } }$ . And we shall denote the indexed family itself by the symbol

$$
\{ A _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J } ,
$$

which is read“the family of all $\pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,as α ranges over $\ j _ { \cdot } ^ { \cdot \rangle }$ Sometimes we write merely $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ ,if it is clear what the index set is.

Note that although an indexing function is required to be surjective,it is not required to be injective.It is entirely possible for $\pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ and $A _ { \beta }$ to be the same set of A, even though α $\neq \beta$

One way in which indexing functions are used is to give a new notation for arbitrary unions and intersections of sets. Suppose that $f : J  \mathcal { A }$ is an indexing function for $\star ;$ let $\pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ denote $f ( { \pmb \alpha } )$ . Then we define

$$
\bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha } = \{ x \mid { \mathrm { f o r ~ a t ~ l e a s t ~ o n e ~ } } \alpha \in J , x \in A _ { \alpha } \} ,
$$

and

$$
\bigcap _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha } = \{ x \mid { \mathrm { f o r ~ e v e r y ~ } } \alpha \in J , x \in A _ { \alpha } \} .
$$

These are simply new notations for previously defined concepts; one sees at once (using the surjectivity of the index function) that the first equals the union of all the elements of A and the second equals the intersection of all the elements of .A.

Two especially useful index sets are the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ of positive intege rs from l to n, and the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ of all positive integers.For these index sets,we introd uce some special notation. If a collection of sets is indexed by the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ ,we denote the indexed family by the symbol $\{ A _ { 1 } , \dotsc , A _ { n } \}$ ,and we denote the union and intersection, respectively,of the members of this family by the symbols

$$
A _ { 1 } \cup \cdots \cup A _ { n } { \mathrm { a n d } } A _ { 1 } \cap \cdots \cap A _ { n } .
$$

In the case where the index set is the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,we denote the indexed family by the symbol $\left\{ A _ { 1 } , A _ { 2 } , \ldots \right\}$ ,and the union and intersection by the respective symbols

$$
A _ { 1 } \cup A _ { 2 } \cup \ldots \qquad \mathrm { a n d } \qquad A _ { 1 } \cap A _ { 2 } \cap \ \cdots \ .
$$

Definition. Let m be a positive integer. Given a set X,we define an m-tuple of elements of X to be a function

$$
\mathbf { x } : \{ 1 , . . . , m \}  X .
$$

If x is an m-tuple, we often denote the value of x at i by the symbol $x _ { i }$ rather than x(i) and call it the ith coordinate of x. And we often denote the function x itself by the symbol

$$
( \pmb { x } _ { 1 } , \dots , \pmb { x } _ { m } ) .
$$

Now let $\{ A _ { 1 } , \dotsc , A _ { m } \}$ be a family of sets indexed with the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , m \}$ Let $\pmb { \chi } =$ $A _ { 1 } \cup \ldots \cup A _ { m }$ . We define the cartesian product of this indexed family, denoted by

$$
\prod _ { i = 1 } ^ { m } A _ { i } \qquad { \mathrm { o r } } \qquad A _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times A _ { m } ,
$$

to be the set of all m-tuples $( \pmb { x } _ { 1 } , \dots , \pmb { x } _ { m } )$ of elements of X such that $\pmb { x } _ { i } \in A _ { i }$ for each i.

EXAMPLE 1．We now have two definitions for the symbol $A \times B$ One definition is, of course,the one given earlier,under which $A \times B$ denotes the set of ali ordered pairs $( a , b )$ such that $a \in A$ and $\boldsymbol { b } \in \pmb { B }$ 、The second definition, just given,defines $A \times B$ as the set of all functons $\texttt { x : } \{ 1 , 2 \} \to A \cup B$ such that $\mathbf { x } ( 1 ) \in \ A$ and $\mathbf { x } ( 2 ) \in \ B$ There Is an obvious bijective correspondence between these two sets,under which the ordered pair (a,b） corresponds to the function x defined by $\mathbf { x } ( 1 ) = \mathbf { a }$ and $\mathbf { x } ( 2 ) = b$ Since we commonly denote this function x in "tuple notation"by the symbol (a,b),the notation itself suggests the correspondence. Thus for the cartesian product of two sets,the general definition of cartesian product reduces essentially to the earlier one.

ExAMPLE2．How does the cartesian product $A \times B \times C$ differ from the cartesian products $A \times ( B \times C )$ and $( A \times B ) \times C ^ { \prime }$ Very little. There are obvious bijective correspondences between these sets,indicated as follows

$$
( a , b , c ) \longleftrightarrow ( a , ( b , c ) ) \longleftrightarrow ( ( a , b ) , c ) .
$$

Definition. Given a set X,we define an ω-tuple of elements of X to be a function

$$
\mathbf { x } : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \longrightarrow x ;
$$

we also call such a function a sequence,or an infinite sequence,of elements of X. lf x is an ω-tuple,we often denote the value of x at i by $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ rather than $\mathbf { x } ( i )$ , and call it the ith coordinate of x.We denote x itself by the symbol

$$
( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ o r ~ } } \quad ( x _ { n } ) _ { n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } } .
$$

Now let $\left\{ A _ { 1 } , A _ { 2 } , \ldots \right\}$ be a family of sets,indexed with the positive integers; let X be the union of the sets in this family. The cartesian product of this indexed family of sets, denoted by

$$
\prod _ { i \in { \bf Z } _ { + } } A _ { i } \mathrm { o r } A _ { 1 } \times A _ { 2 } \times \cdots ,
$$

is defined to be the set of all ω-tuples $( { \pmb x } _ { 1 } , { \pmb x } _ { 2 } , \dots )$ of elements of X such that $x _ { i } \in A _ { i }$ for each i.

Nothing in these definitions requires the sets A,to be different from one another. Indeed,they may all equal the same set X In that case,the cartesian product $A _ { 1 } \times$ $\cdots \times A _ { m }$ is just the set of all m-tuples of elements of X,which we denote by $X ^ { m }$ Similarly, the product $A _ { 1 } \times A _ { 2 } \times \cdots$ is just the set of all ω-tuples of elements of X, which we denote by $X ^ { \omega }$

Later we will define the cartesian product of an arbitrary indexed family of sets.

ExAMPLE3If R is the set of real numbers,then $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ denotes the set of all m-tuples of real numbers; il is often calld euclidean m-space (although Euclid would never recognize it). Analogously, $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is sometimes called “infinite-dinensional euclidean space"; it is the set of all ω-tuples $( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \dots ~ . )$ of real numbers,that is,the set of allfunctions x : $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { R } .$

## Exercises

1. Show there is a bijective correspondence of $A \times B$ with $B \times A$

2.(a) Show that if $n > 1$ there is bijective correspondence of

$$
A _ { \mathsf { l } } \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times A _ { n } \qquad { \mathrm { w i t h } } \qquad ( A _ { \mathsf { l } } \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times A _ { n - 1 } ) \times A _ { n } .
$$

(b)Given the indexed family $\{ A _ { 1 } , A _ { 2 } , \ldots \}$ let $B _ { \iota } \ = \ A _ { 2 i - 1 } \ \times \ A _ { 2 i }$ for each positive integer i. Show there is bijective correspondence of $A _ { 1 } \times A _ { 2 } \times \cdots$ with $B _ { 1 } \times B _ { 2 } \times \cdots$

3. Let $A = A _ { 1 } \times A _ { 2 } \times \cdots \mathrm { a n d } B = B _ { 1 } \times B _ { 2 } \times \cdots$

(a） Show that if $B _ { i } \subset A _ { i }$ for all i, then $B \subset A$ (Strctly speaking,if we are given a function mapping the index set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ into the union of the sets $\pmb { B _ { i } }$ we must change its range before it can be considered as a function mapping $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ into the union of the sets $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ .We shallignore this technicality when dealing with cartesian products).

(b）Show the converse of (a) holds if B is nonempty.

(c）Show that if A is nonempty, each $A _ { t }$ is nonempty. Does the converse hold? (We will return to this question in the exercises of \$19.)

(d）What is the relation between the set $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B }$ and the cartesian product of the sets $A _ { i } \cup B _ { i } ?$ What is the relation between the set A ∩ B and the cartesian product of the sets $A _ { i } \cap B _ { i } ?$

4. Let m, $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . Let $x \neq \emptyset$

(a）If $m \leq n$ ,find an injective map $f : X ^ { m } \to X ^ { n }$

(b) Find a bijective map $g : X ^ { m } \times X ^ { n } \to X ^ { m + n }$

(c） Find an injective map $h : X ^ { n } \to X ^ { \omega } ,$

(d) Find a bijective map $k : X ^ { n } \times X ^ { \omega } \to X ^ { \omega }$

(e） Find a bijective map $l : X ^ { \omega } \times X ^ { \omega } \to X ^ { \omega }$

(f） If $A \subset B$ find an injective map m : $( A ^ { \omega } ) ^ { n }  B ^ { \omega }$

5.Which of the following subsets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ can be expressed as the cartesian product of subsets of R?

(a）{x $\mid x _ { i }$ is an integer for all i).

(b) $\{ \mathbf { x } \mid x _ { i } \geq i$ for all i).

（c） $\{ \pmb { x } \mid x _ { i }$ is an integer for all $i \ge 1 0 0 \}$

(d) $\{ \mathbf { x } \mid x _ { 2 } = x _ { 3 } \}$

## \$6 Finite Sets

Finite sets and infinite sets,countable sets and uncountable sets,these are types of sets that you may have encountered before.Nevertheless,we shall discuss them in this section and the next, not only to make sure you understand them thoroughly,but also to elucidate some particular points of logic that will arise later on. First we consider finite sets.

Recall that if n is a positive integer, we use $s _ { n }$ to denote the set of positive integers less than n; it is called a section of the positive integers.The sets $s _ { n }$ are the prototypes for what we call the finite sets.

Definition.A set is said to befinite if there is a bijective correspondence of A with some section of the positive integers.That is,A is finite if it is empty or if there is a bijection

$$
f : A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \dots , n \}
$$

for some positive integer n. In the former case,we say that A has cardinality O; in the latter case,we say that A has cardinality n.

For instance,the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ itself has cardinality n,for it is in bijective correspondence with itself under the identity function.

Now note carefully:We have not yet shown that the cardinality ofa finite set is uniquely determined by the set. It is of course clear that the empty set must have cardinality zero.But as far as we know,there might exist bijective correspondences of a given nonempty set A with two different sets $\{ 1 , . . , n \}$ and $\{ 1 , \ldots , m \}$ The possibility may seem ridiculous,for it is like saying that it is possible for two people to count the marbles in a box and come out with two different answers,both correct. Our experience with counting in everyday life suggests that such is impossible,and in fact this is easy to prove when n is a small number such as 1,2,or 3.But a direct proof when n is 5 million would be impossibly demanding.

Even empirical demonstration would be diffcult for such a large value of n. One might,for instance,construct an experiment by taking a freight car full of marbles and hiring lO different people to count them independently. If one thinks of the physical problems involved, it seems likely that the counters would not all arrive at the same answer. Of course,the conclusion one could draw is that at least one person made a mistake. But that would mean assuming the correctness of the result one was trying to demonstrate empirically An alternative explanation could be that there do exist bijective correspondences between the given set of marbles and two different sections of the positive integers

In real life,we accept the first explanation.We simply take it on faith that our experence in counting comparatively small sets of objects demonstrates a truth that holds for arbitrarily large sets as well.

However, in mathematics (as opposed to real life),one does not have to take this statement on faith. If it is formulated in terms of the existence of bijective correspondences rather than in terms of the physical act of counting,it is capable of mathematical proof.We shall prove shortly that if $n \neq m$ ,there do not exist bijective functions mapping a given set A onto both the sets $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ and $\{ 1 , \ldots , m \}$

There are a number of other “intuitively obvious” facts about finite sets that are capable of mathematical proof,we shall prove some of them in this section and leave the rest to the exercises.Here is an easy fact to start with:

Lemma 6.1. Let n be a positive integer. Let A be a set: let ao be an element of A. Then there exists a bijective correspondence f of the set A with the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n + 1 \}$ if and only if there exists a bijective correspondence g of the set $A \mathrm { ~ - ~ } \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ with the set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$

Proof.There are two implications to be proved. Let us first assume that there is a bijective correspondence

$$
g : A - \{ a _ { 0 } \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} .
$$

We then define a function $f : A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \dots , n + 1 \}$ by setting

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { f ( x ) = g ( x ) } } & { { \mathrm { f o r } x \in A - \{ a _ { 0 } \} , } } \\ { { f ( a _ { 0 } ) = n + 1 . } } \end{array}
$$

One checks at once that f is bijective.

To prove the converse, assume there is a bijective correspondence

$$
f : A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \ldots , n + 1 \} .
$$

If f maps ao to the number $n + 1$ ,things are especially easy; in that case,the restriction $f | A - \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ is the desired bijective correspondence of $A - \left\{ a _ { 0 } \right\}$ with $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ Otherwise, let $f ( a _ { 0 } ) = m$ ,and let ${ \pmb a } _ { \mathrm { l } }$ be the point of A such that $f ( a _ { 1 } ) = n + 1$ . Then $a _ { 1 } \neq a _ { 0 }$ .Definea new function

$$
h : A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \dots , n + 1 \}
$$

by setting

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { h ( a _ { 0 } ) = n + 1 , } } \\ { { \ } } \\ { { h ( a _ { 1 } ) = m , } } \\ { { \ h ( x ) = f ( x ) \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } x \in A - \{ a _ { 0 } \} - \{ a _ { 1 } \} . } } \end{array}
$$

See Figure 6.l. It is easy to check that h is a bijection.

Now we are back in the easy case; the restriction $\pmb { h } | A - \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ is the desired bijection of $A - \left\{ a _ { 0 } \right\}$ with $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 6.1  
From this lemma a number of useful consequences follow:

Theorem 6.2. Let A be a set; suppose that there exists a bijection $f \cdot A  \{ 1 , \dots , n \}$ for some $n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ .Let B be a proper subset of A Then there exists no bijection $g : B  \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ ; but (provided $B \neq \emptyset )$ there does exist a bijection $\pmb { \mathscr { h } } : \pmb { \mathscr { B } } $ {1,...,.m} for some m < n.

Proof.The case in which $\pmb { B } = \pmb { \emptyset }$ is trivial,for there cannot exist a bijection of the empty set B with the nonempty set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$

We prove the theorem “by induction.” Let C be the subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ consisting of those integers n for which the theorem holds.We shall show that C is inductive.From this we conclude that $c = \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,so the theorem is true for all positive integers n.

First we show the theorem is true for $n = 1$ . In this case A consists of a single element {a},and its only proper subset B is the empty set.

Now assume that the theorem is true for n; we prove it true for $n + 1$ Suppose that $f : A \to \{ 1 , \dots , n + 1 \}$ is a bijection,and B is a nonempty proper subset of A. Choose an element $\pmb { a } _ { \mathbf { 0 } }$ of B and an element ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ of $A - B$ We apply the preceding lemma to conclude there is a bijection

$$
g : A - \{ a _ { 0 } \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} .
$$

Now $\pmb { B } - \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ is a proper subset of $A \mathrm { ~ - ~ } \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ for ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ belongs to $A \mathrm { ~ - ~ } \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ and not to $\pmb { B } - \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ .Because the theorem has been assumed to hold for the integer n,we conclude the following'

(1）There exists no bijection $h : B - \{ a _ { 0 } \} \to \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$

(2） Either $\pmb { { \cal B } } - \{ a _ { 0 } \} = \emptyset$ ,or there exists a bijection

$$
k : B - \{ a _ { 0 } \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \ldots , p \} \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ s o m e ~ } p < n .
$$

The preceding lemma,combined with (l),implies that there is no bijection of B with $\{ 1 , \ldots , n + 1 \}$ . This is the first half of what we wanted to proved. To prove the second half,note that if ${ \pmb B } - \{ { \pmb a } _ { 0 } \} = \emptyset$ ,there is a bijection of B with the set {1};while if $B - \{ a _ { 0 } \} \neq \emptyset$ ,we can apply the preceding lemma,along with (2),to conclude that there is a bijection of B with $\{ 1 , \ldots , p + 1 \}$ .In either case,there is a bijection of B with $\{ 1 , \ldots , m \}$ for some $m < n + 1$ ,as desired. The induction principle now shows that the theorem is true for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ■

Corollary 6.3.If A is finite,there is no bijection of A with a proper subset of itself.

Proof.Assume that B is a proper subset of A and that $f : A \to B$ is a bijection. By assumption,there is a bijection $g : A  \{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ for some n. The composite $g \circ f ^ { - 1 }$ is thena bijection of B with $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ .This contradicts the preceding theorem. □

Corollary 6.4. $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is not finite.

Proof. The function $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + } - \{ 1 \}$ defined by $f ( n ) = n + 1$ is a bijection of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ with a proper subset of itself. ：

Corollary 6.5. The cardinality of a finite set A is uniquely determined by A.

Proof. Let $\textbf { \em m } < \pmb { n }$ .Suppose there are bijections

$$
\begin{array} { r } { f : A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} , } \\ { g : A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \ldots , m \} . } \end{array}
$$

Then the composite

$$
g \circ f ^ { - 1 } : \{ 1 , \dots , n \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \dots , m \}
$$

is a bijection of the finite set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ with a proper subset of itself,contradicting the corollary just proved.