<!-- image-->  
Figure 21.1

The set $B ^ { 2 }$ is called the (closed) unit ball in $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 }$

11.Prove the following standard facts about infinite series:

(a） Show that if $( \pmb { s _ { n } } )$ Is a bounded sequence of real numbers and $s _ { n } \leq s _ { n + 1 }$ for each n,then $( \pmb { s _ { n } } )$ converges.

(b) Let $( a _ { n } )$ be a sequence of real numbers; define

$$
s _ { n } = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } a _ { i } .
$$

If ${ \pmb s } _ { \pmb n }  { \pmb s }$ ,we say that the infinite series

$$
\sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { \infty } a _ { i }
$$

converges to s also. Show that if $\sum a _ { i }$ converges to s and $\sum { b _ { i } }$ converges to t, then $\sum ( \mathsf { c } a _ { i } + b _ { i } )$ converges to $c s + t$

(c） Prove the comparison test for infinite series: If $| a _ { i } | \leq b _ { i }$ for each i,and if the series $\sum { b _ { i } }$ converges,then the series $\sum a _ { i }$ converges. {Hint: Show that the series $\sum | a _ { i } |$ and $\sum c _ { i }$ converge,where ${ \bf c } _ { i } = | a _ { i } | + a _ { i } . \mathrm { ~ }$

(d) Given a sequence of functions $f _ { n } : X \to \mathbb { R }$ let

$$
s _ { n } ( x ) = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } f _ { i } ( x ) .
$$

Prove the Weierstrass M-test for uniform convergence: $H | f _ { i } ( x ) | \leq M _ { i }$ for al $x \in X$ and alli,and if the series $\sum M _ { i }$ converges,then the sequence $( \pmb { s _ { n } } )$ converges uniformly to a function s. {Hint:Let $\begin{array} { r } { r _ { n } = \sum _ { \imath = n + 1 } ^ { \infty } M _ { i } } \end{array}$ . Show that if $k > n$ ,then $| s _ { k } ( x ) - s _ { n } ( x ) | \leq r _ { n }$ ;conclude that $| s ( x ) - s _ { n } ( x ) | \leq r _ { n } . ]$

12.Prove continuity of the algebraic operations on $\mathbb { R } .$ ，as follows:Use the metric $i ( a , b ) = \lvert a - b \rvert$ on R and the metric on $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ given by the equation

$$
\rho ( ( x , y ) , ( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } ) ) = \operatorname* { m a x } \{ | x - x _ { 0 } | , | y - y _ { 0 } | \} .
$$

(a） Show that addition is continuous.[Hint: Given e,let $\delta = \epsilon / 2$ and note that

$$
d ( x + y , x _ { 0 } + y _ { 0 } ) \leq | x - x _ { 0 } | + | y - y _ { 0 } | . . ]
$$

(b） Show that multiplication is continuous.[Hint: Given $( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } )$ and $0 < \epsilon <$ 1, let

$$
3 \delta = \epsilon / ( | x _ { 0 } | + | y _ { 0 } | + 1 )
$$

and note that

$$
d ( x y , x _ { 0 } y _ { 0 } ) \leq | x _ { 0 } | | y - y _ { 0 } | + | y _ { 0 } | | x - x _ { 0 } | + | x - x _ { 0 } | | y - y _ { 0 } | . . 
$$

(c） Show that the operation of taking reciprocals is a continuous map from R- {0} to R.{Hint: Show the inverse image of the interval (a,b) is open. Consider five cases,according as a and b are positive, negative,or zero.]

(d) Show that the subtraction and quotient operations are continuous.

## \*\$22 The Quotient Topologyt

Unlikethe topologies we have alreadyconsidered in this chapter,the quotient topology is not a natural generalization of something you have already studied in analysis. Nevertheless,it is easy enough to motivate. One motivation comes from geometry,where one often has occasion to use “cut-and-paste"techniques to construct such geometric objects as surfaces.The torus (surface of a doughnut),for example,can be constructed by taking a rectangle and “pasting" its edges together appropriately,as in Figure 22.1. And the sphere (surface of a ball) can be constructed by taking a disc and collapsing its entire boundary to a single point; see Figure 22 2. Formalizing these constructions involves the concept of quotient topology.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.1

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.2

Definition.Let X and Y be topological spaces; let $p : X \to Y$ be a surjective map. The map p is said to be a quotient map provided a subset U of Y is open in Y if and only if $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is open in X.

This condition is stronger than continuity; some mathematicians call it “strong continuity.”An equivalent condition is to require that a subset A of Y be closed in Y if and only if $p ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ is closed in X. Equivalence of the two conditions follows from equation

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( Y - B ) = X - f ^ { - 1 } ( B ) .
$$

Another way of describing a quotient map is as follows:We say that a subset C of X is saturated (with respect to the surjective map $p : X \to Y )$ if C contains every set $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} )$ that it intersects. Thus C is saturated if it equals the complete inverse image of a subset of Y.To say that p is a quotient map is equivalent to saying that p is continuous and p maps saturated open sets of X to open sets of Y (or saturated closed sets of X to closed sets of Y).

Two special kinds of quotient maps are the open maps and the closed maps. Recall that a map $f : X \to Y$ is said to be an open map if for each open set U of X, the set $f ( U )$ is open in Y.It is said to be a closed map if for each closed set A of X,the set $f ( A )$ is closed in Y. It follows immediately from the definition that if $p : X \to Y$ is a surjective continuous map that is either open or closed,then p is a quotient map. There are quotient maps that are neither open nor closed.(See Exercise 3.)

EXAMPLE1.Let X be the subspace [0.1]U[2,3] of R,and let Y be the subspace [0,2] of R. The map $p : X \to Y$ defined by

$$
p ( x ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { x } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \in [ 0 , 1 ] , } \\ { x - 1 } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \in [ 2 , 3 ] } \end{array} \right. }
$$

is readily seen to be surjective,continuous,and closed. Therefore it is a quotient map. It is not, however,an open map; the image of the open set [O, I] of X is not open in Y.

Note that if A is the subspace [0.1) U[2,3] of X,then the map $q : A  Y$ obtained by restricting p is continuous and surjective,but it is not a quotient map.For the set [2,3] is open in A and is saturated with respect toq,but its image is not open in Y.

EXAMPLE 2.Let $\pi _ { 1 } : \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ be projection onto the first coordinate; then $\pmb { \pi } _ { 1 }$ is continuous and surjective. Furthermore,π is an open map.For if $\boldsymbol { \upsilon } \times \boldsymbol { V }$ is a nonempty basis element for $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } .$ then $\pi _ { 1 } ( U \times V ) = U$ is open in R; it follows that $\pmb { \pi } _ { 1 }$ caries open sets of $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ to open sets of R.However,r is not a closed map.The subset

$$
C = \{ x \times y \mid x y = 1 \}
$$

of $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ is closed, but $\pi _ { 1 } ( C ) = \mathbb { R } - \left\{ 0 \right\}$ ,which is not closed in R.

Note that if A is the subspace of $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ that is the union of C and the origin {O},then the map $q \cdot A  \mathbb { R }$ obtained by restricting $\pmb { \pi _ { 1 } }$ is continuous and surjective,but it is not a quotient map.For the one-point set {0) is open in A and is saturated with respect to $\pmb q$ but its image is not open in R.

Now we show how the notion of quotient map can be used to construct atopology on a set.

Definition.If X is a space and A is a set and if $p : X \to A$ is a surjective map,then there exists exactly one topology $\mathcal { T }$ on A relative to which p is a quotient map; it is called the quotient topology induced by p.

The topology $\mathcal { T }$ is of course defined by letting it consist of those subsets U of A such that $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is open in X.It is easy to check that is a topology.The sets $\pmb { \emptyset }$ and A are open because $p ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { \mathscr { O } } ) = \pmb { \mathscr { O } }$ and $p ^ { - 1 } ( A ) = X$ ． The other two conditions follow from the equations

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \displaystyle p ^ { - 1 } ( \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } U _ { \alpha } ) = \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } p ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \alpha } ) , } } \\ { { \displaystyle p ^ { - 1 } ( \bigcap _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } U _ { i } ) = \bigcap _ { \iota = 1 } ^ { n } p ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { i } ) . } } \end{array}
$$

EXAMPLE 3.Let $\pmb { p }$ be the map of the real line R onto the three-point set $A = \{ a , b , c \}$ defined by

$$
\begin{array} { r } { p ( x ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { a } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x > 0 , } \\ { b } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x < 0 , } \\ { c } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x = 0 . } \end{array} \right. } } \end{array}
$$

You can check that the quotient topology on A induced by p is the one indicated in Figure 22.3

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.3

There is a special situation in which the quotient topology occurs particularly frequently. It is the following:

Definition.Let X be a topological space,and let $X ^ { \ast }$ be a partition of X into disjoint subsets whose union is X.Let $p : X \to X ^ { * }$ be the surjecuve map that carries each point of X to the element of $X ^ { \ast }$ containing it. In the quotient topology induced by p. the space $X ^ { \ast }$ is called a quotient space of X.

Given $X ^ { \ast }$ ,there is an equivalence relation on X of which the elements Of $X ^ { \ast }$ are the equivalence classes. One can think of $X ^ { \ast }$ as having been obtained by "Identifying" each pair of equivalent points.For this reason,the quotient space $\pmb { \chi } ^ { \star }$ is often called an identification space,or a decomposition space,of the space X.

We can describe the topology of $X ^ { \ast }$ in another way. A subset U of $X ^ { \ast }$ is a collection of equivalence classes,and the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is just the union of the equivalence classes belonging to $\boldsymbol { U }$ 、Thus the typical open set of $X ^ { \ast }$ is a collection of equivalence classes whose union is an open set of X.

EXAMPLE 4．Let X be the closed unit ball

$$
\{ x \times y \mid x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } \leq 1 \}
$$

in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and let $\pmb { \chi } ^ { * }$ be the partition of X consisting of all the one-point sets $\{ x \ \times \ y \}$ for which $x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } < 1$ ,along with the set $S ^ { 1 } = \{ x \ \overset { \cdot } { \times } \ y \} \ | \ x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } = 1 \}$ . Typical saturated open sets in X are pictured by the shaded regions in Figure 22.4. One can show that $\pmb { \chi \cdot }$ is homeomorphic with the subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ Called the unit 2-sphere,defined by

$$
S ^ { 2 } = \{ ( x , y , z ) \mid x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } + z ^ { 2 } = 1 \} .
$$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.4

ExAMPLE5．Let Xbe the rectangle $\left[ 0 , \left. { I } \right\} \times \left\{ 0 , \mathsf { I } \right\} \right]$ Define a partition $\pmb { \chi \cdot }$ of X as follows: It consists of all the one-point sets $\{ x \times y \}$ where $0 < x < 1$ and $0 < y < 1$ ,the following types of two-point sets:

$$
\{ x \times 0 , x \times 1 \} \quad { \mathrm { ~ w h e r e ~ } } 0 < x < 1 ,
$$

$$
\{ 0 \times y , \mid \times y \} \quad { \mathrm { ~ w h e r e ~ } } 0 < y < 1 ,
$$

and the four-point set

$$
\{ 0 \times 0 , 0 \times 1 , 1 \times 0 , 1 \times 1 \} .
$$

Typical saturated open sets in X are pictured by the shaded regions in Figure 22.5; each is an open Set of X that equals a union of elements of $\pmb { \chi } ^ { \star }$

The image of each of these sets under p is an open set of $\pmb { \chi } ^ { \ast }$ ,as indicated in Figure 22.6. This description of $\pmb { \chi } ^ { * }$ is just the mathematical way of saying what we expressed in pictures when we pasted the edges of a rectangle together to form a torus.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.5

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.6

Now we explore the relationship between the notions of quotient map and quotient space and the concepts introduced previously. It is interesting to note that this relationship is not as simple as one might wish.

We have already noted that subspaces do not behave well; if $p : X \to Y$ is a quotient map and A is a subspace of X,then the map $q : A \to p ( A )$ obtained by restricting p need not be a quotient map. One has, however, the following theorem:

Theorem 22.1. Let $p : X \to Y$ be a quotient map; let A be a subspace of X that is saturated with respect to p; let $q : A \to p ( A )$ be the map obtained by restricting p.

(1） If A is either open or closed in X,then q is a quotient map.

\*(2) If p is either an open map or a closed map,then q is a quotient map.

Proof.Step l. We verify first the following two equations:

$$
q ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = p ^ { - 1 } ( V ) \qquad { \mathrm { i f ~ } } V \subset p ( A ) ;
$$

$$
p ( U \cap A ) = p ( U ) \cap p ( A ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } } U \subset X .
$$

To check the first equation,we note that since $V \subset p ( A )$ and A is saturated, $p ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { V } )$ is contained in A.It follows that both $p ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ and $q ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ equal all points of A that are mapped by p into V. To check the second equation, we note that for any two subsets Uand A of X,we have the inclusion

$$
p ( U \cap A ) \subset p ( U ) \cap p ( A ) .
$$

To prove the reverse inclusion,suppose $y = p ( u ) = p ( a )$ ,for $\textbf { \em u } \in \textbf { \em U }$ and $a \in A$ Since A is saturated,A contains the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( p ( a ) )$ ,so that in particular A contains u. Then $\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { y } = \pmb { p } ( \pmb { u } ) } \end{array}$ ,where $u \in U \cap A$

Step 2. Now suppose A is open or p is open. Given the subset V of ${ \pmb p } ( { \pmb A } )$ ，we assume that $q ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in A and show that V is open in $p ( A )$ ·

Suppose first that A is open. Since $\pmb { q } ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in A and A is open in X,the set $\pmb { q } ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in X. Since $q ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = p ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ ,the latter set is open in $\pmb { X }$ so that V is open in Y because p is a quotient map.In particular, V is open in $p ( A )$

Now suppose p is open. Since $q ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = p ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ and $\pmb { q } ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in A, we have $p ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = U \cap A$ for some set U open in X. Now $p ( p ^ { - 1 } ( V ) ) = V$ because p is surjective; then

$$
V = p ( p ^ { - 1 } ( V ) ) = p ( U \cap A ) = p ( U ) \cap p ( A ) .
$$

The set $p ( U )$ is open in Y because p is an open map; hence V is open in $p ( A )$

Step 3.The proof when A or p is closed is obtained by replacing the word “open" by the word "closed" throughout Step 2.

Now we consider other concepts introduced previously. Composites of maps behave nicely; it is easy to check that the composite of two quotient maps is a quotient map; this fact follows from the equation

$$
p ^ { - 1 } ( { \pmb q } ^ { - 1 } ( U ) ) = ( { \pmb q } \circ { \pmb p } ) ^ { - 1 } ( U ) .
$$

On the other hand,products of maps do not behave well; the cartesian product of two quotient maps need not be a quotient map. See Example 7 following. One needs further conditions on either the maps or the spaces in order for this statement to be true.One such,a condition on the spaces,is called local compactness;we shall study it later. Another,a condition on the maps,is the condition that both the maps p and q be open maps.In that case,it is easy to see that $p \times q$ is also an open map,so it is a quotient map.

Finally,the Hausdorff condition does not behave well;even if X is Hausdorff, there is no reason that the quotient space $X ^ { \ast }$ needs to be Hausdorff.There is a simple condition for $X ^ { \ast }$ to satisfy the $T _ { 1 }$ axiom; one simply requires that each element of the partition $X ^ { \ast }$ be a closed subset of X.Conditions that will ensure $X ^ { \ast }$ is Hausdorff are harder to find. This is one of the more delicate questions concerning quotient spaces; we shall return to it several times later in the book.

Perhaps the most important result in the study of quotient spaces has to do with the problem of constructing continuous functions on a quotient space. We consider that problem now. When we studied product spaces, we had a criterion for determining whether a map $f ~ \ { \textbf {  { Z } } } \to \prod X _ { \alpha }$ into a product space was continuous. Its counterpart in the theory of quotient spaces is a criterion for determining when a map $f : X ^ { * } \to Z$ out of a quotient space is continuous. One has the following theorem:

Theorem 22.2. Let $p : X \to Y$ be a quotient map. Let Z be a space and let $g : X \to Z$ be a map that is constant on each set $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} )$ ，for $y \in Y$ Theng induces a map $f : Y \to Z$ such that $f \circ p = g$ Theinduced map f is continuous if and only $i f g$ is continuous; f is a quotient map if and only $i f g$ Is a quotient map.

<!-- image-->

Proof.For each $y \in Y$ the set $g ( p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} ) )$ is a one-point set in Z (since g is constant on $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} ) )$ . If we let $f ( \boldsymbol { y } )$ denote this point, then we have defined a map $f : Y \to Z$ such that for each $x \in { \pmb X }$ $f ( p ( x ) ) = g ( x )$ If fis continuous,then $g = f \circ p$ is continuous.Conversely,suppose g is continuous.Given an open set V of $Z , g ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in X.But $g ^ { - 1 } ( V ) \stackrel { \_ } { = } p ^ { - 1 } ( f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) )$ ; because p is a quotient map,it follows that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in Y.Hence f is continuous.

If f is a quotient map,then g is the composite of two quotient maps and is thus a quotient map.Conversely, suppose that g is a quotient map. Since_g is surjective,so is f.Let V be a subset of Z;we show that V is open in Z if $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in Y. Now the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) )$ is open in X because p is continuous. Since this set equals $g ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ ,the latter is open in X. Then because g is a quotient map, V is open in Z.■

Corollary 22.3.Let $g : X \to Z$ be a surjective continuous map. Let $\pmb { \chi } ^ { \star }$ be the following collection of subsets of X:

$$
X ^ { * } = \{ g ^ { - 1 } ( \{ z \} ) \mid z \in Z \} .
$$

Give $X ^ { \ast }$ the quotient topology.

(a) The map g induces a bijective continuous map $f : X ^ { \ast } \to Z$ ，which isa homeomorphism if and only $i f g$ is a quotient map.

<!-- image-->

(b) If Z is Hausdorff,so is $X ^ { \ast }$

Proof.By the preceding theorem,g induces a continuous map $f : X ^ { * } \to Z ;$ it is clear that f is bijective.Suppose that f is a homeomorphism. Then both f and the projection map $p : X \to X ^ { * }$ are quotient maps,so that their composite q is a quotient map.Converselyuppose thatg isquotentmapThen itfollows fromthereceding theorem that f is a quotient map. Being bijective,f is thus a homeomorphis m.

Suppose Z is Hausdorff. Given distinct pomts of $X ^ { \ast }$ , their images under f are distinct and thus possess disjoint neighborhoods U and V.Then $f ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ and $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ are disjoint neighborhoods of the two given points of $X ^ { \ast }$ □

EXAMPLE6.Let X be the subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ that is the union of the line segments $[ 0 , 1 ] \times$ $\{ { \pmb n } \}$ for $\pmb { { \mathscr { n } } } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ，and let Z be the subspace of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ consisting of all points of the forin ${ \pmb x } \ { \pmb x } \left( { \pmb x } / n \right)$ for $x \in \left[ 0 , 1 \right]$ and $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ .Then X is the union of countably many disjoint line segments,and Z is the union of countably many line segments having an end point in common. See Figure 22.7.

Define a map $g \mathbf { \nabla } \cdot X  z$ by the equation $g ( x \times n ) = x \times ( x / n ) ;$ theng is surjective and continuous. The quotient space $X ^ { \ast }$ whose elements are the sets $pmb { \pmb { \mathscr { E } } } ^ { - 1 } ( \{ \pmb { \imath } \} )$ is simply the space obtained from Xby identifyingthe subset $\left\{ 0 \right\} \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ to a point.The map g induces a bijective continuous map $f \cdot X ^ { \ast } \to Z$ Butfis not a homeomorphism.

To venfy this fact,it suffices to show that g is not a quotient map．Consider the sequence of points ${ \pmb x } _ { n } = ( 1 / n ) \times { \pmb n }$ of X. The set $A = \{ x _ { n } \}$ is a closed subset of X because it has no limut points.Also,it is saturated with respect to g On the other hand,the set $g ( A )$ is not closed in Z,for it consists of the points $z _ { n } = ( 1 / n ) \times ( 1 / n ^ { 2 } )$ ; this set has the origin as a limut point.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.7

EXAMPLE 7. The product oftwo quotient maps need not be a quotient map

We give an example that involves non-Hausdorff spaces in the exercises.Here is another involving spaces that are nicer.

Let $\pmb { \chi } \ = \ \mathbb { R }$ and let $\pmb { \chi } ^ { * }$ be the quotient space obtained from X by identifying the subset $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ to a point $\pmb { b } ;$ let $p : X \to X ^ { * }$ be the quotient map. Let Q be the subspace of R consisting of the rational numbers; let $i : \mathbb { Q } \to \mathbb { Q }$ be the identity map.We show that

$$
p \times i . x \times \mathbb { Q } \to X ^ { * } \times \mathbb { Q }
$$

is not a quotient map.

For each n, let $\dot { c } _ { n } = \sqrt { 2 } / n$ ,and consider the straight lines in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ with slopes 1 and -l, respectively,through the point n $\times ~ c _ { n }$ Let $U _ { n }$ consist of all points of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \mathbb { Q } }$ that lie above both of these lines or beneath both of them,and also between the vertical lines $x = n - 1 / 4$ and $x = n + 1 / 4$ Then $U _ { n }$ is open in $\pmb { X } \times \pmb { \mathbb { Q } }$ ; it contains the set $\{ n \} \times \mathbb { Q }$ because $c _ { n }$ is not rational. See Figure 22.8

Let U be the union of the sets $U _ { n }$ ：then U is open in $\pmb { \chi } \times \mathbb { Q } .$ It is saturated with respect to $p \times i$ because it contains the enture set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \{ q \}$ for each ${ \pmb q } \in \mathbb { Q }$ We assume that $U ^ { \prime } = ( p \times i ) ( U )$ is open in $X ^ { \bullet } \times \mathbb { Q }$ and derive a contradiclion

Because U contains,in particular, the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times 0 .$ theset $U ^ { \prime }$ contains ihe point ${ \pmb b \times \bf 0 }$ Hence $\pmb { U } ^ { \prime }$ contains an open sel of the form $W \times I _ { \delta }$ ,where W is a neighborhood of b in $\pmb { \chi } ^ { \star }$ and $I _ { \delta }$ consists of all ralional numbers y with $| y | < \delta$ .Then

$$
p ^ { - 1 } ( W ) \times I _ { \delta } \subset U .
$$

Choose n large enough that $c _ { n } < \delta .$ Then since $p ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { W } )$ is open in X and contains $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ we can choose $\epsilon < 1 / 4$ so that the interval $( n - \epsilon , n + \epsilon )$ is contained in $p ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { W } )$ . Then U contains the subset $V = ( n - \epsilon , n + \epsilon ) \times l _ { \delta }$ of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \mathbb { Q } }$ But the figure makes clear that there are many points $\pmb { x } \times \pmb { y }$ of V that do not lie in U! (One such is ihe point $\pmb { x } \times \pmb { y }$ ,where ${ \pmb x } = { \pmb n } + \frac { 1 } { 2 } { \pmb \epsilon }$ andy is a rational number with $| y - c _ { n } | < { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \epsilon \ \rangle$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 22.8

## Exercises

1. Check the details of Example 3.

2. (a) Let $p : X \to Y$ be a continuous map. Show that if there is a continuous map $f : Y \to X$ such that $p \circ f$ equals the identity map of Y,then p is a quotient map.

(b） If $A \subset X$ ,a retraction of X onto A is a continuous map $r : X \to A$ such that $\pmb { r } ( \pmb { a } ) = \pmb { a }$ for each $a \in A$ . Show that a retraction is a quotient map.

3. Let $\pi _ { 1 } : \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ be projection on the firstcoordinate Let A be the subspace of R× R consisting of all points $x \times y$ forwhich either $x \ge 0 \mathrm { o r } y = 0$ (or both); let ${ \pmb q } : { \pmb A } $ R be obtained by restricting $\pmb { \pi } _ { 1 }$ . Show ihat q is a quotient map that is neither open nor closed.

4.(a）Define an equivalence relation on the plane $\ b { X } = \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ as follows:

$$
x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 } \sim x _ { 1 } \times y _ { 1 } \mathrm { i f } x _ { 0 } + y _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } = x _ { 1 } + y _ { \parallel } ^ { 2 } .
$$

Let $X ^ { \ast }$ be the corresponding quotient space. It is homeomorphic to a familiar space;what is it? [Hint:Set ${ \bar { g } } ( x \times y ) = x + y ^ { 2 } .$

(b） Repeat (a) for the equivalence relation

$$
x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 } \sim x _ { 1 } \times y _ { 1 } ~ \mathrm { i f } ~ x _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } + y _ { 0 } ^ { 2 } = x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } + y _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } .
$$

5. Let $p : X \to Y$ be an open map. Show that if A is open in X,then the map $q : A \to p ( A )$ obtained by restricting p is an open map.

6.Recall that $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ denotes the real line in the K-topology.(See ＆I3.） Let Y be the quotient space obtained from $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ by collapsing the set K to a point; let p： $\mathbb { R } _ { K } \to Y$ be the quotient map.

(a） Show that Y satisfies the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom,but is not Hausdorff.

(b) Show that $p \times p \ . \ \mathbb { R } _ { K } \times \mathbb { R } _ { K } \to Y \times Y$ is not a quotient map. {Hint: The diagonal is not closed in $Y \times Y$ ,but its inverse image is closed in $\mathbb { R } _ { K } \times \mathbb { R } _ { K }$ 1

## \*Supplementary Exercises: Topological Groups

In these exercises we consider topological groups and some of their properties. The quotient topology gets its name from the special case that arises when one forms the quotient of a topological group by a subgroup.

A topological group G is a group that is also a topological space satisfying the $T _ { 1 }$ axiom,such that the map of $G \times G$ into G sending $x \times y$ into $x \cdot y .$ and the map of G into G sending x into $x ^ { - 1 }$ ,are continuous maps. Throughout the following exercises, let G denote a topological group.

1. Let H denote a group that is also a topological space satisfying the $T _ { 1 }$ axiom. Show that H is a topological group if and only if the map of $H \times H$ into H sending $\boldsymbol { x } \times \boldsymbol { y }$ into $x \cdot y ^ { - 1 }$ is continuous.

2. Show that the following are topological groups:

(a) $( \mathbb { Z } , + )$

(b) $( \mathbb { R } , + )$

(c) $( \mathbb { R } _ { + } , \cdot )$

(d) $( \pmb { S } ^ { 1 } , \cdot )$ , where we take $s ^ { 1 }$ to be the space of all complex numbers z for which $| z | = 1$

(e) The general linear group ${ \bf G L } ( n )$ ,under the operation of matrix multiplication.(GL(n） is the set of all nonsingular n by n matrices,topologized by considering it as a subset of euclidean space of dimension $n ^ { 2 }$ in the obvious way.)

3.Let H be a subspace of G.Show that if H is also a subgroup of G,then both H and $\bar { H }$ are topological groups.

4.Let α be an element of G.Show that the maps $f _ { \alpha } , g _ { \alpha } : G \to G$ detined by

$$
f _ { \alpha } ( x ) = \alpha \cdot x \qquad { \mathrm { a n d } } \qquad g _ { \alpha } ( x ) = x \cdot \alpha
$$

are homeomorphisms of G.Conclude that $\pmb { G }$ is a homogeneous space. (This means that for every pair x,yof points of G,there exists a homeomorphism of G onto itself that carries x to y.)

5. Let H be a subgroup of G. If ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb G }$ ,define $: H = \{ x \cdot h \mid h \in H \}$ ; this set is called a left coset of H in G. Let $G / H$ denote the collection of left cosets of H in $G ;$ it is a partition of G. Give $G / H$ the quotient topology.

(a) Show that if $\pmb { \alpha } \in G$ ,the map $f _ { \alpha }$ of the preceding exercise induces a homeomorphism of $G / H$ carrying x H to $( { \pmb { \alpha } } \cdot { \pmb { x } } ) { \pmb { H } }$ Conclude that $G / H$ isa homogeneous space.

(b) Show that if H is a closed set in the topology of $G .$ ,then one-point sets are closed in $G / H$

(c） Show that the quotient map $p : G \to G / H$ is open.

(d) Show that if H is closed in the topology of G and is a normal subgroup of $\pmb { G }$ then $G / H$ is a topological group.

6.The integers $\mathbb { Z }$ are a normal subgroup of $( \mathbb { R } , + )$ . The quotient $\mathbb { R } / \mathbb { Z }$ is a familiar topological group; what is it?

7. If A and B are subsets of G,let A·B denote the set of all points ${ \pmb a } \cdot { \pmb b }$ for $a \in A$ and $\ b { b } \in \ b { B }$ Let $A ^ { - 1 }$ denote the set of all points $a ^ { - 1 }$ ,for $a \in A$

(a)A neighborhood V of the identity element e is said to be symmetric if $\pmb { V } =$ $\pmb { V } ^ { - 1 }$ . If U is a neighborhood of e,show there is a symmetric neighborhood V of e such that V. $v \subset U$ ．[Hint:If Wis a neighborhood of $e ,$ then $W \cdot W ^ { - 1 }$ is symmetric.]

(b)Show that G is Hausdorff.In fact,show that if $x \neq y$ ,thereisa neighborhood V of e such that $\boldsymbol { v } \cdot \boldsymbol { x }$ and $\pmb { V } \cdot \mathbf { y }$ are disjoint.

(c）Show that G satisfies the following separation axiom,which is called the regularity axiom: Given a closed set A and a point x not in A, there exist disjoint open sets containing A and x,respectively. [Hint: There is a neighborhoodVof e such that $\boldsymbol { v } \cdot \boldsymbol { x }$ and V · A are disjoint.]

(d)Let H be a subgroup of G that is closed in the topology of $\pmb { G }$ let $p : G $ $G / H$ be the quotient map. Show that $G / H$ satisfies the regularity axiom. [Hint. Examine the proof of (c) when A is saturated.]