Definition.A set A with an order relation < is said to be wel-ordered if every nonempty subset of A has a smallest element.

EXAMPLE l．Consider the set $\{ 1 , 2 \} \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ in the dictionary ordering.Schernatically, it can be represented as one infinite sequence followed by another infinite sequen ce:

$$
a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , a _ { 3 } , . . . ; b _ { 1 } , b _ { 2 } , b _ { 3 } , . . . .
$$

with the understanding that each element is less than every element to the right of it.It is not difficult to see that every nonempty subset C of this ordered set has a smallest element: If C contains any one of the elements $a _ { n }$ ，we simply take the smallest elerment of the intersection of $c$ with the sequence $a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , \ldots$ ：whileif C contains no ${ a _ { n } }$ 、then it is a subset of the sequence $b _ { 1 } , b _ { 2 } , \ldots$ and as such has a smallest element.

EXAMPLE2Consider the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ in the dictionary order. Schematically, it can be represented as an infinite sequence of infinite sequences. We show that it is well-ordered. Let Xbe a nonempty subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ Let A be the subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ consisting of all frst coordinates of elements of X Now A has asmallest element; call it ao.Then the collection

$$
\{ b \mid a _ { 0 } \times b \in X \}
$$

is a nonempty subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ let ${ \pmb b _ { 0 } }$ be its smallest element. By definitionof the dictionary order, $a _ { 0 } \times b _ { 0 }$ is the smallest element of X. See Figure l0.1.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 10.1  
EXAMPLE 3. The set of integers is not well-ordered in the usual order,the subset consisting of the negative integers has no smallest element. Nor is the set of real numbers in the interval $0 \leq x \leq 1$ well-ordered; the subset consisting of those x for which $0 < x < 1$ has no smallst element (although it has a greatest lower bound,of course).

There are several ways of constructing well-ordered sets．Two of them are the following:

(l）If A is a well-ordered set,then any subset of A is well-ordered in the restricted order relation.

(2)If A and B are well-ordered sets,then $A \times B$ is well-ordered in the dictionary order.

The proof of (1) is trivial; the proof of (2) follows the patern given in Example 2.

It follows that the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } )$ is well-ordered in the dictionary order; it can be represented as an infinite sequence of infinite sequences of infinite sequences. Similarly, $( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { 4 }$ Is well-ordered in the dicuonary order. And so on. But if you try to generalize to an infinite product of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ with itself,you will run into trouble. We shall examine this situation shortly.

Now,given a set A without an order relation,it is natural to ask whether there exists anorderrelation for A that makes it intoa wellorderedset.If A is finite,any bijection

$$
f \cdot A \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \cdot \cdot , n \}
$$

can be used to define an order relation on A; under this relation,A has the same order type as the ordered set $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ . In fact,every order relation on a finite set can be obtained in this way:

Theorem 10.1．Every nonempty finite ordered set has the order type of a section $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,so it is well-ordered.

Proof.This was given as an exercise in $\ S 6 ;$ we prove it here. First,we show that every finite ordered set A has a largest element. If A has one element,this is trivial. Supposing it true for sets having $\pmb { n } - 1$ elements,let A have n elements and let $a _ { 0 } \in A$ Then $A - \{ a _ { 0 } \}$ has a largest element ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ ,and the larger of $\left\{ a _ { 0 } , a _ { 1 } \right\}$ is the largest element of A.

Second,we show there is an order-preserving bijection of A with $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ for some n．If A has one element,this fact is trivial． Suppose that it is true for sets having $n - 1$ elements.Let b be the largest element of A.By hypothesis,there is an order-preserving bijection

$$
f ^ { \prime } : A - \{ b \} \longrightarrow \{ 1 , \dots , n - 1 \} .
$$

Define an order-preserving bijection $f : A \to \{ 1 , \dots , n \}$ by setting

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { f ( x ) = f ^ { \prime } ( x ) } } & { { \mathrm { f o r } x \not = b , } } \\ { { f ( b ) = n . } } \end{array}
$$

Thus,a finite ordered set has only one possible order type.For an infinite set, things are quite different. The well-ordered sets

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \mathbb { Z } _ { + } , } \\ & { \{ 1 , \ldots , n \} \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } , } \\ & { \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } , } \\ & { \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) } \end{array}
$$

are all countably infinite,but they allhave different order types,as you can c heck.

All the examples we have given of well-ordered sets are orderings of countable sets. It is natural to ask whether one can find a well-ordered uncountable set.

The obvious uncountable set to try is the countably infinite product

$$
X = \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \cdot \cdot = ( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { \omega }
$$

of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ with itself. One can generalize the dictionary order to this set in a natural way, by defining

$$
( a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , . . . ) < ( b _ { 1 } , b _ { 2 } , . . . )
$$

if for some $n \geq 1$

$$
a _ { i } = b _ { i } , \qquad \mathrm { f o r } \enskip \iota < n \mathrm { a n d } \ a _ { n } < b _ { n } .
$$

This is,in fact,anorderrelationontheset X; butunfortunatelyit is nota well-ordering. Consider the set A of all elements x of X of the form

$$
\mathbf { x } = ( 1 , \ldots , 1 , 2 , 1 , 1 , \ldots ) ,
$$

where exactly one coordinate of x equals 2,and the others are all equal to 1. The set A clearly has no smallest element.

Thus,the dictionary order at least does not give a well-ordering of the set $( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { \omega }$ Is there some other order relation on this set that is a wellordering?No one has ever constructed a specific well-ordering of $( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { \omega }$ . Nevertheless,there is a famous theorem that says such a well-ordering exists:

Theorem (Well-ordering theorem).If A is a set, there exists an order relation on A that isa well-ordering.

This theorem was proved by Zermelo in l9O4,and it startled the mathematical world.There was considerable debate as to the correctness of the proof; the lack of any constructive procedure for well-ordering an arbitrary uncountable set led many to be skeptical.When the proof was analyzed closely,the only point at which it was found that there might be some question was a construction involving an infinite number of arbitrary choices,that is,a construction involving—the choice axiom.

Some mathematicians rejected the choice axiom as a result, and for many years a legitimate question about a new theorem was: Does its proof involve the choice axiom or not? A theorem was considered to be on somewhat shaky ground if one had to use the choice axiom in its proof.Present-day mathematicians,by and large,do not have such qualms.They accept the axiom of choice as a reasonable assumption about set theory,and they accept the well-ordering theorem along with it.

The proof that the choice axiom implies the well-ordering theorem is rather long (although not exceedingly difficult)and primarily of interest to logicians,we shall omit it. If you are interested,a proof is outlined in the supplementary exercises at the end of the chapter. Instead,we shall simply assume the well-ordering theorem whenever we need it. Consider it to be an additional axiom of set theory if you like!

We shall in fact need the full strength of this assumption only occasionally. Most of the time,all we need is the following weaker result:

Corollary. There exists an uncountable well-ordered set.

We now use this result to construct a particular well-ordered set that willprove to be very useful.

Definition.Let X be a well-ordered set Given $\pmb { \alpha } \in \pmb { X }$ let $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ denote the set

$$
S _ { \alpha } = \{ x \mid x \in X { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } x < \alpha \} .
$$

It is called the section of X by α.

Lemma 10.2. There exists a well-ordered set A having a largest element Ω,such that the section $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ of Aby  is uncountable but every other section of Ais countable.

Proof.We begin with an uncountable well-ordered set B Let C be the well-ordered set $\{ 1 , 2 \} \times B$ in the dictionary order; then some section of C is uncountable. (Indeed, the section of C by any element of the form $2 \times b$ is uncountable.） Let  be the smallest element of C for which the section of C by $\Omega$ is uncountable Then let A consist of this section along with the element Ω. □

Note that $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ is an uncountable well-ordered set every section of which is countable Its order type is in fact uniquely determined by this condition. We shall call it a minimal uncountable well-ordered set. Furthermore,we shall denote the well-ordered set $A = S _ { \Omega } \cup \{ \Omega \}$ by the symbol $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ (for reasons to be seen later)

The most useful property of the set $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ for our purposes is ex pressed in the following theorem'

Theorem 10.3. If A is a countable subset of ${ \pmb S } _ { \Omega }$ ,then A has an upper bound in $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$

Proof.Let A be a countable subset of $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ Foreach $a \in A$ ,the section ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb a }$ is countable.Therefore,the union $\textstyle B = \bigcup _ { a \in A } S _ { a }$ is also countable Since $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ is uncountable, the set B is not all of $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ let x be a point of $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ that is not in B. Then x is an upper bound for A.For if $x \ < \ a$ for some a in A,then x belongs to $\pmb { S _ { u } }$ and hence to $\pmb { B } ,$ contrary to choice.

## Exercises

1. Show that every well-ordered set has the least upper bound property.

2. (a)Show that in a well-ordered set, every element except the largest (if one exists) has an immediate successor.

(b) Find a set in which every element has an immediate successor that is not well-ordered.

3. Both $\{ 1 , 2 \} \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ and $ { \mathbb { Z } } _ { + } \times \{ 1 , 2 \}$ are well-ordered in the dictionary Order. Do they have the same order type?

4. (a) Let $\mathbb { Z } _ { - }$ denote the set of negative integers in the usual order. Show that a simply ordered set A fails to be well-ordered if and only if it contains a subset having the same order type as $\mathbb { Z } _ { - }$

(b) Show that if A is simply ordered and every countable subset of A is wellordered, then A is well-ordered.

5.Show the well-ordering theorem implies the choice axiom.

6. Let $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ be the minimal uncountable well-ordered set.

(a) Show that $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ has no largest element.

(b） Show that for every α $\epsilon \mathfrak { S } _ { \Omega }$ ,the subset $\{ x \mid \alpha < x \}$ is uncountable.

(c） Let $\scriptstyle { \pmb { X } } _ { 0 }$ be the subset of ${ \pmb S } _ { \Omega }$ consisting of all elements x such that x has no immediate predecessor. Show that $X _ { 0 }$ is uncountable.

7. Let J be a well-ordered set. A subset $J _ { 0 }$ of Jis said to be inductive if for every $\alpha \in J$

$$
( S _ { \alpha } \subset J _ { 0 } ) \Longrightarrow \alpha \in J _ { 0 }
$$

Theorem (The principle of transfinite induction).If J is a well-ordered set and $J _ { 0 }$ 1s an inductive subset of J,then $\mathbf { \nabla } J _ { 0 } = J$

8. (a) Let $A _ { 1 }$ and $A _ { 2 }$ be disjoint sets,well-ordered by $< 1$ and $< 2$ ，respectively. Define an order relation on $A _ { 1 } \cup A _ { 2 }$ by letting $a < b$ either if a, $b \in A _ { 1 }$ and $a < 1 \ b ,$ orif a, $\pmb { b } \in \pmb { A } _ { 2 }$ and $a < _ { 2 } b$ ,or if $a \in A _ { 1 }$ and $b \in A _ { 2 }$ . Show that this is a well-ordering

(b）Generalize (a) to an arbitrary family of disjoint well-ordered sets,indexed by a well-ordered set.

9.Consider the subset A of $( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { \omega }$ consisting of allinfinite sequences of positive integers ${ \bf x } = ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , . . . )$ that end in an infinite string of $\mathbf { l } ^ { \prime } \mathbf { s }$ Give A the following order: $\textbf { x } < \textbf { y }$ if $x _ { n } < y _ { n }$ and $x _ { i } = y _ { i }$ for $i > n$ We call this the “antidictionary order"on A.

(a) Show that for every n,there is a secuon of A that has the same order type as $( \mathbb { Z } _ { + } ) ^ { n }$ in the dictionary order.

(b） Show A is well-ordered.

10.Theorem.Let Jand C be well-ordered sets;assume that there is no surjective function mapping a section of J onto C．Then there exists a unique function h. $\pmb { \jmath }  \pmb { C }$ satisfying the equation

（\*）

$$
h ( x ) = s m a l l e s t \left[ C - h ( S _ { x } ) \right]
$$

for each $x \in J$ ，where $\pmb { S } _ { \pmb { x } }$ is the section of J by x.

(a)If h and k map sections of J,or all of J,into C and satisfy (\*) for all x in theirrespective domains,show that $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { x } ) = \pmb { k } ( \pmb { x } )$ for all x in both domains.

(b)If there exists a function h : ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }  { \pmb C }$ satisfying (\*),show that there exists a function $k \cdot S _ { \alpha } \cup \{ \alpha \}  C$ satisfying (\*).

（c）If $\kappa \subset J$ and for all $\alpha \in K$ there exists a function $\begin{array} { r } { h _ { \alpha } \cdot S _ { \alpha }  C } \end{array}$ satisfying (\*),show that there exists a function

$$
k : \bigcup _ { \alpha \in K } S _ { \alpha } \longrightarrow C
$$

satisfying (\*).

(d） Show by transfinite induction that for every $\beta \in J$ ,there exists a function $h _ { \beta } : S _ { \beta } \to C$ satisfying (\*).[Hint:If $\beta$ has an immediate predecessor α, then $S _ { \beta } = S _ { \alpha } \cup \{ \alpha \}$ . If not, $s _ { \beta }$ is the union of all $\pmb { \mathscr { S } } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ with $\alpha < \beta . ]$

(e） Prove the theorem.

11.Let A and B be two sets Using the wel-rdering theorem, prove that either they have the same cardinality,or one has cardinality greater than the other.[Hint: If there is no surjection $f : A \to B$ ,apply the preceding exercise.]

## \*§\$11 The Maximum Principle+

We have already indicated that the axiom of choice leads to the deep theorem that every set can be well-ordered.The axiom of choice has other consequences that are even more important in mathematics. Collectively referred to as“maximum principles." they come in many versions Formulated independently by a number of mathematicians,including F.Hausdorff,K.Kuratowski,S.Bochner,and M. Zorn, during the years l914-l935,they were typically proved as consequences of the well-ordering theorem. Later, it was realized that they were in fact equivalent to the well-ordering theorem.We consider several of them here.

First,we make a definition．Given a set A,a relation <on A is called a strict partial order on A if it has the following two properties:

(l）(Nonreflexivity) The relation a <α never holds.

(2）(Transitivity) If $a \prec b$ and b $\prec \mathfrak { c } .$ then $a \prec c .$

These are just the second and third of the properties of a simple order (see &3); the comparability property is the one that is omitted. In other words,a strict partial order behaves just lke a simple order except that it need not be true that for every pair of distinct points x and y in the set,either x < y or y< x.

If < is a strict partial order on a set A,it can easily happen that some subset B of A is simply ordered by the relation;allthat is needed is for every pair of elements of B to be comparable under <.

Now we can state the following principle,which was first formulated by Hausdorff in 1914.

Theorem (The maximum principle). Let A be a set; let < be a strict partial order on A.Then there exists a maximal simply ordered subset B of A.

Said differently, there exists a subset B of A such that B is simply ordered by < and such that no subset of A that properly contains B is simply ordered by <.

ExAMPLE 1 If A is any collecuon of sets,the relation “is a proper subset $\mathbf { o f } ^ { \prime }$ is a strict partial order on A. Suppose that A is the collecuon of allcircular regions (interiors of circles)in the plane.One maximal simply ordered subcollecuon of A con sists of all circular regions with centers at the origin Another maximal simply ordered subcollecton consists of allcircular regions bounded by circles tangent from the nght to the y-axis at the ongin See Figure Ill.

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Figure 11.1  
ExAMPLE 2.If $( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } )$ and $( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )$ are two points of the plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ define

$$
( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } ) \prec ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )
$$

if $y _ { 0 } ~ = ~ y _ { 1 }$ and $x _ { 0 } ~ < ~ x _ { 1 }$ This is a partial ordening of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ under which two points are comparable only if they lie on the same honzontal line The maximal simply ordered sets are the honzontal lines in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

One can give an intuitive “proof"of the maximum principle that is rather appealing.It involves a step-by-step procedure,which one can describe in physical terms as follows. Suppose we take a box,and put into it some of the elements of A according to the following plan:First we pick an arbitrary element of A and put it in the box. Then we pick another element of A. If it is comparable with the element in the box, we put it in the box too; otherwise,we throw it away. At the general step,we will have a collection of elements in the box and a collection of elements that have been tossed away. Take one of the remaining elements of A If it is comparable with everything in the box,toss it in the box,too,otherwise,throw it away. Similarly contin ue. After you have checked all the elements of A,the elements you have in the box will be comparable with one another,and thus they will form a simply ordered set. Every element not in the box will be noncomparable with at least one element in the box,for that was why it was tossed away. Hence,the simply ordered set in the box is maximal, for no larger subset of A can satisfy the comparability condition

Now of course the weak point in the preceding “proof' comes when we said, “After you have checked all the elements of A.” How do you know you ever“get through" checking all the elements of A? If A should happen to be countable,it is not hard to make this intuitive proof into a real proof.Let us take the countably infinite case;the finite case is even easier. Index the elements of A bijectively with the positive integers,so that $A = \{ a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } \ldots \cdot \}$ This indexing gives a way of deciding what order to test the elements of A in,and how to know when one has tested them all.

Now we define a function $h : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \{ 0 , 1 \}$ 、by letung it assign the value O to i if we "put $a _ { i }$ in the box,”and the value l if we“throw $a _ { i }$ away." This means that $h ( 1 ) = 0$ and for $i > 1$ ，we have $\pmb { h } ( i ) = 0$ if and only if $a _ { i }$ is comparable with every element of the set

$$
\{ a _ { j } \mid j < i \mathrm { \ a n d } h ( j ) = 0 \} .
$$

By the principle of recursive definition,this formula determines a unique functon h. $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to \{ 0 , 1 \}$ It is easy to check that the set of those $a _ { j }$ for which $h ( j ) = 0$ is a maximal simply ordered subset of A.

If A is not countable,a variant of this procedure wil work,if we allow ourselves to use the well-ordering theorem.Instead of indexing the elements of A with the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ we index them (in a bijective fashion) with the elements of some well-ordered set J,so that $A = \{ a _ { \alpha } \mid \alpha \in J \}$ .For this we need the well-ordering theorem,so that we know there is a bijection between A and some well-ordered set J.Then we can proceed as in the previous paragraph,letting α replace i in the argument. Strictly speaking, you need to generalize the principle of recursive definition to well-ordered sets as wel, but that is not particularly difficult. (See the Supplementary Exercises.)

Thus,the well-ordering theorem implies the maximum principle.

Although the maximum principle of Hausdorff was the first to be formulated and is probably the simplest to understand,there is another such principle that is nowadays the one most frequently quoted.It is popularly called “Zorn's Lemma,"although Kuratowski (1922) and Bochner (1922) preceded Zorn (1935) in enunciating and proving versions of it. For a history and discussion of the tangled history of these ideas,see [C] or [Mo]. To state this principle,we need some terminology.

Definition.Let A be a set and let <be a strict partial order on A. If B is a subset of A,an upper bound on B is an element c of A such that for every b in B,either $\ b = c$ or $\textit { \textbf { b } } \prec \textit { \textbf { c } }$ A maximal element of A is an element m of A such that for no element a of A does the relation m < a hold.

Zorn's Lemma.Let A be a set that is stnctly partially ordered. If every simply ordered subset of A has an upper bound in A,then A has a maximal element.

Zorn's lemma is an easy consequence of the maximum principle: Given A, the maximum principle implies that A has a maximal simply ordered subset B. The hypothesis of Zorn's lemma tells us that B has an upper bound c in A. The element c is thenautomaticallya maximal element of A.For if $c \prec d$ for some element d of A, then the set $B \cup \{ d \}$ ,which properly contains B,is simply ordered because $b \prec d$ for every ${ \pmb b \in \pmb B }$ .This fact contradicts maximality of B.

It is also true that the maximum principle is an easy consequence of Zorn's lemma. See Exercises 5-7.

One final remark. We have defined what we mean by a strict partial order on a set, but we have not said what a partial order itself is. Let < be a strict partial order on a set A Suppose that we define ${ \pmb a } \preceq { \pmb b }$ if either $\alpha \prec b$ or ${ \pmb a } = { \pmb b }$ Then the relation $\preceq 1 s$ called a partial order on A For example,the inclusion relation C on a collection of sets is a partial order,whereas proper inclusion is a strict partial order.

Many authors prefer to deal with partial orderings rather than strict partiaI orderings,the maximum principle and Zorn's lemma are often expressed in these terms. Which formulation is used is simply a matter of taste and convenience.

## Exercises

1. If a and b are real numbers,define a <b if b- a is positive and rational. Show this is a strict partial order on R.What are the maximal simply ordered subsets?

2.(a)Let <be a strict partial order on the set A. Define arelation on A by letting $a \preceq b$ if either $a \prec b \ o \tau a = b$ .Show that this relation has the following properties,which are called the partial order axioms:

(i) ${ \pmb { a } } \preceq { \pmb { a } }$ for all $a \in A .$

(ii) $a \preceq b$ and $b \preceq a \Longrightarrow a = b$

(iii) $a \preceq b$ and $b \preceq c \Longrightarrow a \preceq c .$

(b) Let P be a relation on A that satisfies properties (i)-(ii).Define a relation S on Aby letting aSb if u Pb and $a \neq b$ 、Show that S is a strict partial order on A.

3.Let A be a set with a strict partial order <; let $x \in A$ . Suppose that we wish to find a maximal simply ordered subset B of A that contains x. One plausible way of attempting to define B is to let B equal the set of all those elements of A that are comparable with x;

$$
B = \{ y \mid y \in A { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ e i t h e r ~ } } x \prec y { \mathrm { ~ o r ~ } } y \prec x \} .
$$

But this will not always work. In which of Examples l and 2 will this procedure succeed and in which will it not?

4. Given two points $( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } )$ and $( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,define

$$
( x _ { 0 } , y _ { 0 } ) \prec ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } )
$$

if $x _ { 0 } < x _ { 1 }$ and $y _ { 0 } \le y _ { 1 }$ . Show that the curves $y = x ^ { 3 }$ and $y = 2$ are maximal simply ordered subsets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,and the curve $y = x ^ { 2 }$ is not.Find all maximal simply ordered subsets.

5. Show that Zorn's lemma implies the following:

Lemma (Kuratowski).Let A be a collection of sets. Suppose that for every subcollection B of A that is simply ordered by proper inclusion,the union of the elements of B belongs to A Then A has an element that is properly contained in no other element of A.

6.A collection A of subsets of a set X is said to be of finite type provided that a subset B of X belongs to A if and only if every finite subset of B belongs to A. Show that the Kuratowski lemma implies the following.

Lemma (Tukey,1940).Let A be a collection of sets.If A is of finite type,then A has an element that is properly contained in no other element of A.

7.Show that the Tukey lemma implies the Hausdorff maximum principle. [Hint: If <is a strict partial order on A,let A be the collection of all subsets of A that are simply ordered by<.Show that A is of finite type.]

8.A typical use of Zorn's lemma in algebra is the proof that every vector space has a basis.Recall that if A is a subset of the vector space V,we say a vector belongs to the span of A if it equals a finite linear combination of elements of A. The set A is independent if the only finite linear combination of elements of A that equals the zero vector is the trivial one having all coefficients zero. If A is independent and if every vector in V belongs to the span of A,then A is a basis for V.

(a)If A is independent and $v \in V$ does not belong to the span of A,show $\pmb { A } \cup \{ \pmb { v } \}$ is independent.

(b） Show the collection of all independent sets in V has a maximal element.

(c） Show that V has a basis.

## \*Supplementary Exercises: Well-Ordering

In the following exercises, we ask you to prove the equivalence of the choice axiom, the well-ordering theorem,and the maximum principle.We comment that of these exercises,only Exercise 7 uses the choice axiom.

1.Theorem (General principle of recursive definition)．Let J be a well-ordered set; let C be a set.Let F be the set of all functions mapping sections of J into C. Given a function $\rho : \mathcal { F }  C$ ,there exists a unique function $h : J \to C$ such that $\begin{array} { r } { h ( \alpha ) = \rho ( h | S _ { \alpha } ) } \end{array}$ for each $\alpha \in J$

[Hint: Follow the pattern outlined in Exercise 10 of §10.]

2.(a）Let Jand E be well-ordered sets,let $h : J \to E$ . Show the following two statements are equivalent:

(i) h is order preserving and its image is E or a section of E.

(ii) $h ( \alpha ) = \mathrm { s m a l l e s t } \left[ E - h ( S _ { \alpha } ) \right]$ for all α .

[Hint: Show that each of these conditions implies that $h ( S _ { \alpha } )$ is a section of E,conclude that it must be the section by $h ( \alpha ) . ]$

(b） If E is a well-ordered set,show that no section of E has the order iype of E, nor do two different secuons of E have the same order type. [Hint: Given J, there is at most one order-preserving map of J into E whose image is E or a section of E.]

3.Let J and E be well-ordered sets; suppose there is an order-preserving map $k : J \to E$ Using Exercises l and 2,show that J has the order type of E or a section of E.[Hint:Choose $e _ { 0 } \in E$ . Define $h : J \to E$ by the recursion formula

$$
h ( \alpha ) = \mathrm { s m a l l e s t } \left[ E - h ( S _ { \alpha } ) \right] \quad \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } \quad h ( S _ { \alpha } ) \neq E ,
$$

and $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { \alpha } ) \ = \ e _ { 0 }$ otherwise．Show that $h ( \alpha ) \ \leq \ k ( \alpha )$ for all α;conclude that $h ( S _ { \alpha } ) \neq E$ for all α.]

4. Use Exercises l-3 to prove the following\*

(a）If A and B are well-ordered sets,then exactly one of the following three Conditions holds: A and B have the same order type,or A has the order type of a section of B,or B has the order type of a section of A. [Hint: Form a well-ordered set containing both A and B,as in Exercise 8 of lO;then apply the preceding exercise.]

(b） Suppose that A and B are well-ordered sets that are uncountable,such that every section of A and of B is countable. Show A and B have the same order type.

5.Let X be a set; let A be the collection of all pairs $( A , < )$ ，whereAisasubset of X and< is a well-ordering of A.Define

$$
( A , < ) \prec ( A ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } )
$$

if $( A , < )$ equals a section of $( A ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } )$

(a） Show that < is a strct partial order on A.

(b) Let $\pmb { \mathcal { B } }$ be a subcollection of A that is simply ordered by <.Define $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ to be the union of the sets B,for all $( B , < ) \in \mathcal { B }$ ；and define $< ^ { \prime }$ to be the union of the relations<,for all $( B , < ) \in \mathcal { B }$ . Show that $( B ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } )$ Is a welI-ordered set.

6. Use Exercises l and 5 to prove the following:

Theorem. The maximum principle is equivalent to the wel-ordering theorem.

7. Use Exercises l-5 to prove the following.

Theorem.The choice axiom is equivalent to the well-ordering theorem.

Proof. Let X beaset,letc be a fixed choice function for the nonempty subsets of X.If T is a subset of X and < is a relation on $\pmb { T }$ we say that $( T , < )$ is a tower in Xif<isa well-ordering of Tand if for each ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb T }$

$$
x = c ( X - S _ { x } ( T ) ) ,
$$

where ${ \pmb S } _ { { \pmb x } } ( { \pmb T } )$ is the section of T by x.

(a） Let $( T _ { 1 } , < _ { 1 } )$ and $( T _ { 2 } , < _ { 2 } )$ be two towers in X. Show that either these two ordered sets are the same,or one equals a section of the other.[Hint: Switching indices if necessary,we can assume that $h : T _ { 1 }  T _ { 2 }$ is order preserving and $h ( T _ { 1 } )$ equals either $\pmb { T } _ { 2 }$ or a section of $\pmb { T } _ { 2 }$ Use Exercise 2 to show that $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { x } ) = \pmb { x }$ for all x.]

(b)If(T,<) is a tower in X and $\boldsymbol { T } \ne X$ ,show there is a tower in X ofwhich $( T , < )$ is a section.

(c） Let $\{ ( T _ { k } , < _ { k } ) | k \in K \}$ be the collection of all towers in X.Let

$$
T = \bigcup _ { k \in K } T _ { k } \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad { \mathrm { ~ < = ~ } } \bigcup _ { k \in K } ( < _ { k } ) .
$$

Show that $( T , < )$ is a tower in X. Conclude that $\pmb { T } = \pmb { X }$

8.Using Exercises l-4,construct an uncountable well-ordered set,as follows. Let A be the collection of all pairs $( A , < )$ ,where A isa subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ and <is a wellordering of A.(We allow A to be empty.）Define $( A , < ) \sim ( A ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } )$ if $( A , < )$ and $( A ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } )$ have the same order type.It is trivial to show this is an equivalence relation. Let $\left[ ( A , < ) \right]$ denote the equivalence class of $( A , < )$ ; letE denote the collection of these equivalence classes.Define

$$
[ ( A , < ) ] \ll [ ( A ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } ) ]
$$

if $( A , < )$ has the order type of a section of $( A ^ { \prime } , < ^ { \prime } )$

(a） Show that the relation < is well defined and is a simple order on E.Note that the equivalence class $\left[ ( \emptyset , \emptyset ) \right]$ is the smallest element of E.

(b) Show that if $\alpha = [ ( A , < ) ]$ is an element of E,then $( A , < )$ has the same order type as the section $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } } ( E )$ of E by α.[Hint: Define a map $f : A  E$ by setting $f ( x ) = [ ( S _ { x } ( A )$ ,restriction of <)] for each $x \in A . ]$

(c）Conclude that E is well-ordered by <.

(d) Show that E is uncountable.[Hint: If $h : E \to \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is a bijection,then h gives rise to a well-ordering of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + . } ]$

This same argument,with $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ replaced by an arbitrary well-ordered set X, proves (without use of the choice axiom) the existence of a well-ordered set E whose cardinality is greater than that of X.

This exercise shows that one can construct an uncountable well-ordered set, and hence the minimal uncountable well-ordered set, by an explicit construction that does not use the choice axiom. However,this result is less interesting than it might appear. The crucial property of ${ \pmb S } _ { \Omega }$ ,the one we use repeatedly,is the fact that every countable subset of $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ has an upper bound in $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ . That fact depends, in turn,on the fact that a countable union of countable sets is countable.And the proof of that result (if you exainine it carefully) involves an infinite number of arbitrary choices-that is,it depends on the choice axiom.

Said differently,without the choice axiom we may be able to construct the minimal uncountable well-ordered set,but we $\mathbf { c a n ^ { \prime } t }$ use it for anything!