A UC as theur boundaries.

Theorem 64.2. Let X be the utilities graph. Then X cannot be imbedded in the plane.

Proof.If X can be imbedded in the plane,then it can be imbedded in $s ^ { 2 }$ . So suppose X is a subspace of $\displaystyle s ^ { 2 }$ .We derive a contradiction.

We use the notation of Example 2,where g,w,e, h1, h2,and $h _ { 3 }$ are the vertices of X.Let A, B,and C be the following arcs contained in X:

$$
\begin{array} { r } { A = g h _ { 1 } w , } \\ { B = g h _ { 2 } w , } \\ { C = g h _ { 3 } w . } \end{array}
$$

Each pair of these arcs intersect in their end points g and w alone; hence $Y = A \cup B \cup C$ is a theta space. The space Y separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ into three components U,V,and W,whose boundaries are $A \cup B , B \cup C$ ,and $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { C }$ ,respectively. See Figure 64.4.

Now the vertex e of X lies in one of these three components,so that the arcs $e h _ { 1 }$ and $e h _ { 2 }$ and $e h _ { 3 }$ of X lie in the closure of that component.That component cannot be U,for $\bar { \upsilon }$ is contained in U U A U B,a set that does not contain the point $h _ { 3 }$ Similarly,the component containing e cannot be V or W,because $\bar { \nu }$ does not contain $\pmb { h } _ { 1 }$ ,and $\widetilde { \pmb { W } }$ does not contain $h _ { 2 }$ .Thus,we have reached a contradiction.

<!-- image-->

Lemma 64.3. Let X be a subspace of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ that is a complete graph on four vertices ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ ${ \pmb a } _ { 2 } , { \pmb a } _ { 3 }$ and $\pmb { a _ { 4 } }$ .Then X separates $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ into four components. The boundaries of these components are the sets $X _ { 1 } , X _ { 2 } , X _ { 3 }$ ,and $\pmb { \chi } _ { 4 }$ where $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ is the union of those edges of X that do not have $\mathbf { \pmb { a } } _ { i }$ as a vertex.

Proof.Let Y be the union of all the arcs of X different from the arc $\pmb { a } _ { 2 } \pmb { a } _ { 4 }$ . Then we can write Y as a theta space by seting

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { A = a _ { 1 } a _ { 2 } a _ { 3 } , } } \\ { { \ } } \\ { { B = a _ { 1 } a _ { 3 } , } } \\ { { \ } } \\ { { C = a _ { 1 } a _ { 4 } a _ { 3 } . } } \end{array}
$$

See Figure 64.5. The arcs A, B,and C intersect in their end points ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ and a3 alone, and their union is Y.

<!-- image-->

The space Y separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ into three components U,V,and $\pmb { W }$ ，whose boundaries are $A \cup B , B \cup C$ and $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { C }$ ,respectively.The space $a _ { 2 } a _ { 4 } - a _ { 2 } - a _ { 4 }$ ,being connected, must lie in one of them. It cannot lie in $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ ,because A U B does not contain $\pmb { \alpha _ { 4 } }$ And it cannot lie in V because $B \cup C$ does not contain $\pmb { a } _ { 2 }$ .Hence it must lie in $\pmb { W }$

Now $\bar { U } \cup \bar { V }$ is connected because $\bar { \upsilon }$ and $\bar { \nu }$ are connected and have nonempty intersection B.Furthermore,the set $\boldsymbol { \bar { \upsilon } } \cup \boldsymbol { \bar { V } }$ does not separate $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ ,because its complement is W.Similarly, the arc $\pmb { a } _ { 2 } \pmb { a } _ { 4 }$ is connected and does not separate $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ . And the sets $\pmb { a } _ { 2 } \pmb { a } _ { 4 }$ and $\bar { U } \cup \bar { V }$ intersect in the points $\pmb { a } _ { 2 }$ and $\pmb { a _ { 4 } }$ alone.It follows from Theorem 63.5 that $a _ { 2 } a _ { 4 } \cup \bar { U } \cup \bar { V }$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into two components ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb W } _ { 2 }$ . Then $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { Y }$ 1s the union of the four disjoint connected sets U,V, ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ ,and ${ \cal { W } } _ { 2 }$ . Since these sets are open, they are the components of $s ^ { 2 } - \boldsymbol { Y }$ ·

Now one of these components,namely U,has the graph $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B } = \pmb { X _ { 4 } }$ as its boundary. Symmetry implies that the other three have $X _ { 1 } , X _ { 2 }$ ,and $\pmb { { \cal X } } _ { 3 }$ as their respective boundaries. □

Theorem 64.4. The complete graph on five vertices cannot be imbedded in the plan.

Proof.Suppose that G is a subspace of $s ^ { 2 }$ that is a complete graph on the five veruces $a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , a _ { 3 } , a _ { 4 }$ ,and ${ \pmb a } { \pmb S }$ . Let X be the union of those edges of G that do not have ${ \pmb a } { \pmb 5 }$ as a vertex; then X is a complete graph on four vertices.The space X separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into four components,whose respective boundaries are the graphs $X _ { 1 } , \ldots , X _ { 4 }$ where $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ consists of those edges of X that do not have ${ \pmb a } _ { i }$ as a vertex. Now the point $\pmb { a } \pmb { 5 }$ must lie in one of these four components. It follows that the connected space

$$
a _ { 1 } a _ { 5 } \cup a _ { 2 } a _ { 5 } \cup a _ { 3 } a _ { 5 } \cup a _ { 4 } a _ { 5 } ,
$$

which is the union of those edges of G that have $\pmb { a } \pmb { 5 }$ as a vertex,must lie in the closure of this component. Then all the vertices $a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { 4 }$ lie in the boundary of this component.

But this is impossible,for none of the graphs $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ contains all four vertices $a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { 4 }$ Thus we reach a contradiction.

It follows from these theorems that if a graph G contains a subgraph that is a utilities graph or a complete graph on five vertices,then G cannot be imbedded in the plane.It is a remarkable theorem,due to Kuratowski, that the converse is also true! The proof 1s not easy.

## Exercise

1.Let X be a space that is written as the union of finitely many arcs $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n }$ each pair of which intersect in at most a common end point.

(a) Show that X is Hausdorffif and only if each arc $A _ { i }$ is closed in X.

(b) Give an example to show that X need not be Hausdorf. [Hint: See Exercise 5 of \$36.]

## \$65The Winding Number of a Simple Closed Curve

$\operatorname { I f } h : S ^ { 1 } \to { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 } - 0$ is a continuous map, then the induced homomorphism $h _ { \ast }$ carries a generator of the fundamental group of $j ^ { \iota }$ to some integral power of a generator of the fundamental group of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbb { 0 }$ .This integral power n is called the winding number of h with respect to 0. It measures how many times h "wraps $s ^ { 1 }$ around the origin;"its sign depends of course on the choice of generators. See Figure 65.1. We will introduce it more formally in the next section.

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Figure 65.1

For the present, we merely ask the question: What can one say about the winding number of h if h is injective,that is,if h is a homeomorphism of $s ^ { 1 }$ with a simple closed curve C in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \theta ?$ The illustrations in Figure 65.2 suggest the obvious conjecture: If 0 belongs to the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ ，then $\pmb { n = 0 }$ while if 0 belongs to the bounded component, then $n = \pm 1$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 65.2

The first conjecture is easy to prove,for Lemma 6l.2 tels us that h is nulhomotopic if 0 belongs to the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - c$ .On the other hand,the second conjecture is surprisingly difficult; it is in fact a rather deep result. We prove it in this section.

As usual,we shall replace $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \cup \{ \infty \}$ by $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ , letting $\pmb { p }$ be the point corresponding to 0 and $\pmb q$ be the point corresponding to oo. Then our conjecture can be reformulated as follows: If C is a simple closed curve in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ and if $\pmb { p }$ and $\pmb q$ belong to different components of $s ^ { 2 } - c$ ,then the inclusion mapping $j : C \to S ^ { 2 } - p - q$ induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups. This is what we shall prove.

First, we prove our result in the case where the simple closed curve C is contained in a complete graph on four vertices. Then we prove the general case.

Lemma 65.1. Let G be a subspace of $s ^ { 2 }$ that is a complete graph on four vertices $a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { 4 }$ .Let C be the subgraph $a _ { 1 } a _ { 2 } a _ { 3 } a _ { 4 } a _ { 1 }$ ,which isa simple closed curve.Let $\pmb { p }$ and q be interior points of the edges $a _ { 1 } a _ { 3 }$ and $\pmb { a } _ { 2 } \pmb { a } _ { 4 }$ ,respectively. Then:

(a）The points pand q lie in different components of ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb C }$

(b） The inclusion $j : C \to S ^ { 2 } - p - q$ induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups.

Proof.(a) As in the proof of Lemma 64.3,the theta space $\pmb { C } \cup \pmb { a } _ { 1 } \pmb { a } _ { 3 }$ separates $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ into three components U,V,and W. One of these,say $\pmb { W }$ has $c$ as its boundary; it is the only component whose boundary contains both ${ \pmb a } _ { 2 }$ and $\pmb { a _ { 4 } }$ .Therefore, $a _ { 2 } a _ { 4 } - a _ { 2 } - a _ { 4 }$ must lie in $\pmb { W }$ ,so that in partcular,q belongs to $\pmb { W }$ Of course, $\pmb { p }$ is not in $\pmb { W }$ because $\pmb { p }$ belongs to the theta space $C \cup a _ { 1 } a _ { 3 }$ . Now Lemma 64.1 tells us that $\pmb { W }$ is one of the components of $s ^ { 2 } - { \dot { c } }$ ; therefore, $\pmb { p }$ and $\pmb q$ belong to different components of $s ^ { 2 } - c$

(b) Let $X = s ^ { 2 } - p - q$ ． The idea of the proof is the following:We choose a point x interior to the arc $\pmb { a } _ { 1 } \pmb { a } _ { 2 }$ ,and a point y interor to the arc $\pmb { a } _ { 3 } \pmb { a } _ { 4 }$ . And we let α and $\beta$ be the broken-line paths

$$
\alpha = x a _ { 1 } a _ { 4 } y \quad \quad \mathrm { a n d } \quad \quad \beta = y a _ { 3 } a _ { 2 } x .
$$

Then $\alpha * \beta$ is a loop lying in the simple closed curve C.We shall prove that $\alpha * \beta$ represents a generator of the fundamental group of X.It follws that the homomorphism

$j _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( C , x ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x )$ is surjective,so that $j _ { \ast }$ must be an isomorphism (since the groups involved are infinite cyclic). See Figure 65.3.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 65.3

Let $D _ { 1 }$ and $D _ { 2 }$ be the arcs

$$
D _ { 1 } = p a _ { 3 } a _ { 2 } q \qquad \mathrm { a n d } \qquad D _ { 2 } = q a _ { 4 } a _ { 1 } p ,
$$

and let $U = { { \pmb S } ^ { 2 } } - { \pmb D } _ { 1 }$ and $V = s ^ { 2 } - D _ { 2 }$ . See Figure 65.4. Then $X = U \cup V$ and $\boldsymbol { \upsilon } \cap \boldsymbol { v }$ equals $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - D$ ，where D is the simple closed curve $D = D _ { 1 } \cup D _ { 2 }$ .Hence, $\boldsymbol { U } \cap \boldsymbol { V }$ has two components,by the Jordan curve theorem. Furthermore,since D equals the simple closed curve $a _ { 1 } a _ { 3 } a _ { 2 } a _ { 4 } a _ { 1 }$ ,the result of (a) imples that the points x and y, which lie interior to the other two edges of the graph G,lie in different components of ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb D }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 65.4

The hypotheses of Theorem 63.l are thus satisfied. The path α is a path in U from x to y,while $\pmb { \beta }$ is a path in V from y to x. Because the fundamental group of X is infinite cyclic, the loop $\alpha * \beta$ represents a generator of this group.

Now we prove our main theorem.

Theorem 65.2. Let C be a simple closed curve in $s ^ { 2 } ,$ let $\pmb { p }$ and q lie in different components of ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb C }$ .Then the inclusion mapping $j : C \to S ^ { 2 } - p - q$ induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups.

Proof.The proof involves constructing a complete graph on four vertices that contains C as a subgraph.

Step 1. Let $a , b ,$ ,and c be three distinct points of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ . If A is an arc with end points points a and b,and if B is an arc with end points b and c,then there exists an arc contained in $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B }$ with end points a and c.

Choose paths $f : I \to A$ from a to b,and $g : I  B$ from b to c,such that f and $\pmb { g }$ are homeomorphisms.Let $\pmb { t _ { 0 } }$ be a smallest point of I such that $f ( t _ { 0 } ) \in B ;$ and let $t _ { \mathrm { l } }$ be the point of 丨 such that $g ( t _ { 1 } ) = f ( t _ { 0 } )$ . Then the set $f ( [ 0 , t _ { 0 } ] ) \cup g ( [ t _ { 1 } , 1 ] )$ is the required arc. $( \mathrm { I f } t _ { 0 } = 0 \mathrm { o r } t _ { 1 } = 1$ ,one of these sets consists of a single point.） See Figure 65.5.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 65.5

Step 2.We show that if U is an open set of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,any two points of U that can be connected by a path in U are the end points of an arc lying in $\boldsymbol { U }$

If $x , y \in U$ set $x \sim y$ if $x = y$ or if there is an arc in U with end points x and y. The result of Step l shows that this is an equivalence relation. The equivalence classes are open,for if the E-neighborhood of x lies in U,it consists of points equivalent to x. Since U is connected, there is only one such equivalence class.

Step 3.Let C be a simple closed curve in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ . We construct a subspace $\pmb { G }$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ that is a complete graph on four vertices $a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { 4 }$ such that C equals the subgraph $a _ { 1 } a _ { 2 } a _ { 3 } a _ { 4 } a _ { 1 }$

For convenience,we assume that O lies in the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ Consider the x-axis $\mathbb { R } \times 0$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ; let $a _ { 1 }$ be the largest point on the negative x-axis that lies in $c$ and let ${ \pmb a } _ { 3 }$ be the smallest point on the positive x-axis that lies in C. Then the line segment $\mathbf { \delta } _ { a _ { 1 } a _ { 3 } }$ lies in the closure of the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$

Let us write C as the union of two arcs $c _ { 1 }$ and $c _ { 2 }$ with end points ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb a } _ { 3 }$ Let $\pmb { a }$ be a point of the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ Since $C _ { 1 }$ and $C _ { 2 }$ do not separate $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ，we can choose paths $\alpha : I  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C _ { 1 }$ and $\beta : I  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C _ { 2 }$ from a to ${ \pmb 0 } ;$ in view of Step 2,we may assume that α and $\beta$ are injective. Let $a _ { 2 } = \alpha ( t _ { 0 } )$ where $t _ { 0 }$ is the smallest number such that $\alpha ( t _ { 0 } ) \in C$ ：then ${ \pmb a } _ { 2 }$ is a point interior to $c _ { 2 }$ Similarly, let $a _ { 4 } = \beta ( t _ { 1 } )$ ,where $t _ { 1 }$ is the smallest number such that $\beta ( t _ { 1 } ) \in C$ ：then $\pmb { a 4 }$ is an interior point of $C _ { 1 }$ . Then ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( [ 0 , t _ { 0 } ] )$ and $\beta ( [ 0 , t _ { 1 } ] )$ are arcs joining a to ${ \pmb a } _ { 2 }$ and $\pmb { a 4 }$ respectively; by Step 2,their union contains an arc with end points $\pmb { a } _ { 2 }$ and ${ \pmb a } _ { { \pmb 4 } } \mathrm { ) }$ thus arc intersects C only in these two points.This arc,along with the line segment $a _ { 1 } a _ { 3 }$ and the curve C,forms the desired graph. See Figure 65.6.

<!-- image-->

Step 4. It follows from the result of Step 3 and the preceding lemma that for some pair of points $p , q$ lying in different components of $s ^ { \bar { 2 } } - c$ ,the inclusion $j : C \to$ $\dot { s } ^ { 2 } - p ^ { } - q$ induces an isomorphsm of fundamental groups. To complete the proof, we need only show that the same holds for any pair $p , q$ of points lying in different components of $s ^ { 2 } - { \cal C }$ .For that purpose,itsufices toprove the following:

Let D be a simple closed curve in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ; suppose O lies in the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - D$ . Let $p$ be another point of this component. If inclusion $j : D \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups,then so does the inclusion $\pmb { k } : D  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - p$

Let $\boldsymbol { f } \cdot \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \boldsymbol { p } \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \boldsymbol { 0 }$ be the homeomorphism $f ( x ) = x - p$ It suffices to show that the map

$$
D \xrightarrow { \quad k \quad } \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - p \xrightarrow { \quad f \quad } \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - { \bf 0 }
$$

indices an isomorphism of fundamental groups.Let α be a path in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - D$ from 0 to p,and let $\pmb { F } : \dot { \pmb { D } } \times \pmb { I }  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 }$ be the map $\pmb { F } ( \pmb { x } , t ) = \pmb { x } - \pmb { \alpha } ( t )$ . Then $\pmb { F }$ is a homotopy between $j$ and $f \circ k ;$ since j induces an isomorphism,so does $f \circ k$ (See Corollary 58.5). ■

This theorem is a special case of a rather deep theorem of algebraic topology, concerning the“linking number”of two disjoint subspaces of $S ^ { m + n + 1 }$ ,one homeomorphic to an m-sphere and the other homeomorphic to an n-sphere; it is related to the Alexander duality theorem. (See [Mu],p.433.) The special case of our theorem is that of a O-sphere (i.e.,a two-point space) and a l-sphere (i.e.,a simple clo sed curve) in $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$

## \$66The Cauchy Integral Formula

One of the central theorems in the study of functions of a complex variable is the one concerning the Cauchy integral formula for analytic functions. For the classical version of this theorem,one needs to assume not only the Jordan curve theorem,but also the winding-number theorem of the last section. There is, however,a refornulation of the Cauchy integral theorem that avoids using these results; this version of the theorem,although it is rather less natural, is the one now commonly found in texts on the subject.

Since we have the Jordan curve theorem at our disposal, we shall set ourselves the task of derving the Cauchy integral formula in its classical version from the reformulated version.

We begin by introducing the notion of “winding number" more formally.

Definition. Let $f$ be a loop in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,and let a be a point not in the image of $f .$ Set

$$
g ( s ) = [ f ( s ) - a ] / \| f ( s ) - a \| ;
$$

then $\pmb { g }$ is a loop in $s ^ { 1 }$ .Let $p : \mathbb { R }  s ^ { 1 }$ be the standard covering map,and let $\tilde { g }$ be a lifting of $\pmb { \mathscr { z } }$ to ${ \bf { \bar { \boldsymbol { s } } } } ^ { 1 }$ .Because g is a loop,the difference $\tilde { g } ( 1 ) - \tilde { g } ( 0 )$ is an integer. This integer is called the winding number of $\pmb { f }$ with respect to a,and is denoted $n ( f , a )$ ·

Note that $n ( f , a )$ is independent of the choice of the lifting of ${ \pmb g } .$ Forif $\bar { g }$ is one lifting of ${ \pmb g } ,$ then uniqueness of liftings implies that any other lifting of $\pmb { \mathscr { g } }$ has the form $\tilde { g } ( s ) + m$ for some integer m.

Definition.Let $F : I \times I \to X$ be a continuous map such that $F ( 0 , t ) = F ( 1 , t )$ for allt. Then for each t,the map $f _ { t } ( s ) = F ( s , t )$ is a loop in X.The map $\pmb { F }$ is called afree homotopy between the loops $f _ { 0 }$ and $f _ { 1 }$ . It is a homotopy of loops in which the base point of the loop is allowed to move during the homotopy.

Lemma 66.1. Let f be a loop in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - a$

(a) $\pmb { U } \bar { f }$ is the reverse of f,then $n ( \bar { f } , a ) = - n ( f , a )$

(b) If f is freely homotopic to $f ^ { \prime }$ ，through loops lying in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb a }$ ，then ${ \pmb n } ( f , { \pmb a } ) =$ $n ( f ^ { \prime } , a )$ ·

(c) If a and b lie in the same component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - f ( I )$ , then $n ( f , a ) = n ( f , b )$

Proof.(a) To compute ${ n ( \bar { f } , a ) }$ , one replace s by $\pmb { 1 - s }$ throughout the definition. This has the effect of changing $\tilde { g } ( 1 ) - \tilde { g } ( 0 )$ by a sign

(b) Let $\pmb { F }$ be a free homotopy between f and $f ^ { \prime }$ Define $G : l \times l \to s ^ { 1 }$ by the equation

$$
G ( s , t ) = [ F ( s , t ) - a ] / \| F ( s , t ) - a \| .
$$

Let $\bar { G }$ be a lifting of G to R.Then $\tilde { G } ( 1 , t ) - \tilde { G } ( 0 , t )$ is an integer for each t; being continuous, it is constant.

(c) Let α be a path in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - f ( I )$ from a to b.Note that by definition, $n ( f , a ) =$ $n ( f - a , \mathbf { 0 } )$ . Since $f ( s ) - \alpha ( t )$ is a free homotopy in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbb { 0 }$ between $f - a$ and $f - b$ our result follows.

Definition. Let f be a loop in X.We call f a simple loop provided $f ( s ) = f ( s ^ { \prime } )$ only if $\pmb { s } = \pmb { s } ^ { \prime }$ or if one of the points $\pmb { \mathscr { s } } , \pmb { \mathscr { s } } ^ { \prime }$ is O and the other is i.If f is asimple loop, its image set is a simple closed curve in X.

Theorem 66.2. Let f be a simple loop in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ .If a lies in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - f ( I )$ ,thenn $( f , a ) = 0$ whileifa lies in the bounded component, $n ( f , a ) = \pm 1$

Proof.Since $n ( f , a ) = n ( f - a , \mathbf { 0 } )$ ，we may restrict ourselves to the case ${ \pmb a } = { \pmb 0 }$ Furthermore,we may assume that the base point of f lies on the positive x-axis. For one can gradually rotate $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbb { 0 }$ until the base point of f is such a point; this modifies f by a free homotopy,so it does not affect the conclusion of the theorem.

So let f be a simple loop in $\pmb { X } = \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 }$ based at a point $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ of the positive xaxis. Let $c$ be the simple closed curve $f ( l )$ . We show that if O lies in the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ then[f] generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ ,while if O lies in the unbounded component,[f] is trivial.

The map f induces,via the standard quotient map $p : I  S ^ { 1 }$ ,ahomeomorphism $\pmb { \mathscr { h } } : \pmb { \mathscr { S } } ^ { 1 }  \overline { { \pmb { C } } }$ The element [p] generates the fundamental group of $s ^ { 1 }$ ，so $h _ { * } [ p ]$ generates the fundamental group of C.If O lies in the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \dot { C }$ Theorem 65.2 tells us that $j _ { * } h _ { * } [ p ] = [ f ]$ generates the fundamental group of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ where $j : C \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ is the inclusion. On the other hand,if O lies in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ ,then $j \circ h$ is nulhomotopic by Lemma 61.2,so that[f] is trivial.

Now we show that if[f] generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ , then $n ( f , { \pmb 0 } ) = \pm 1$ ，while if $[ f ]$ is trivial, $n ( f , { \pmb 0 } ) = 0$ Since the retraction $x \to x / \| x \|$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbb { 0 }$ onto $s ^ { 1 }$ induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups,the loop $g ( s ) = f ( s ) / \| f ( s ) |$ representsa generator of $\pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , b _ { 0 } )$ in the first case,and the identity element in the second case. lf we examine the isomorphism $\phi : \pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , b _ { 0 } ) \ :  \ : \mathbb { Z }$ constructed in the proof of Theorem 54.5,we see this means that when we lift g to a path $\bar { \pmb g }$ in R beginning at ${ \bf 0 } ,$ the path $\bar { g }$ ends at $\pm 1$ in the first case,and at O in the second. □

Definition. Let $f$ be a simple loop in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ We say f is a counterclockwise loop if $n ( f , a ) = + 1$ for some a (and hence for every a) in the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - f ( I )$ .We say it is a clockwise loop if $n ( f , a ) = - 1$ . The standard loop $p ( s ) =$ (cos 2π s, sin $2 \pi s )$ is thus a counterclockwise loop.

## Application to complex variables

We now relate winding numbers to complex line integrals.

Lemma 66.3. Let f be a piecewise-differentiable loop in the complex plane; let a be a point not in the image of f.Then

$$
n ( f , a ) = \frac { 1 } { 2 \pi i } \int _ { f } \frac { d z } { z - a } .
$$

This equation is often used as the definition ofthe winding number of $\pmb { f }$

Proof.The proof is a simple exercise in computation. Let $p : \mathbb { R }  s ^ { 1 }$ be the standard covering map. Let $r ( s ) = \| f ( s ) - a \|$ and $g ( s ) = [ f ( s ) - a ] / r ( s )$ . Let $\pmb { \tilde { g } }$ be a lifting of g to R. Set $\pmb \theta ( s ) = 2 \pi \tilde { \pmb g } ( s )$ . Then $f ( s ) - a = r ( s ) \exp ( i \theta ( s ) )$ , so that

$$
\begin{array} { l } { \displaystyle \int _ { f } \frac { d z } { z - a } = \int _ { 0 } ^ { 1 } [ ( r ^ { \prime } e ^ { i \theta } + i r \theta ^ { \prime } e ^ { i \theta } ) / r e ^ { i \theta } ] d s } \\ { \displaystyle \qquad = [ \log r ( s ) + i \theta ( s ) ] _ { 0 } ^ { 1 } } \\ { \displaystyle \qquad = i [ \theta ( 1 ) - \theta ( 0 ) ] } \\ { \displaystyle \qquad = 2 \pi i [ \tilde { g } ( 1 ) - \tilde { g } ( 0 ) ] . } \end{array}
$$

Theorem 66.4 (Cauchy integral formula-classical version). Let C be a simple closed piecewise-differentiable curve in the complex plane. Let B be the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ .If F(z) is analytic in an open set  that contains B and C,then for each point a of B,

$$
F ( a ) = \pm { \frac { 1 } { 2 \pi i } } \int _ { C } { \frac { F ( z ) } { z - a } } d z .
$$

The sign $i s + i f C$ is oriented counterclockwise,and- otherwise.

Proof.We derive this formula from the version of it proved in Ahlfors [A],which is the following:

LetFbe analytic in a region Ω. Let f be a piecewise-differentiable loop in . Assume that $n ( f , b ) = 0$ foreach b not in 2. $l f a \in \Omega$ and a is not in the image of f, then

$$
n ( f , a ) \cdot F ( a ) = { \frac { 1 } { 2 \pi i } } \int _ { f } { \frac { F ( z ) } { z - a } } d z .
$$

We apply this result to a piecewise-differentiable parametrization fof our simple closed curve C.The condition $n ( f , b ) = 0$ holds for each b not in , since any such b lies in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ Furthermore, ${ \pmb n } ( f , { \pmb a } ) = \pmb { \pmb \Sigma } |$ whenever a is in B,the sign depending on the orientation of C,by Theorem 66.2.The theorem follows. □

Note that one cannot even state the classical version of the Cauchy integral theorem without knowing the Jordan curve theorem. To prove it requires even more, namely, knowledge of the winding number of a simple closed curve. It is of interest to note that this latter result can be proved (at least in the differentiable case) by an entirely different method,using the general version of Green's Theorem,proved in analysis. This proof is outlined in Exercise 2.

## Exercises

1. Let f be a loop in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb { a } } ;$ let $g ( s ) = [ f ( s ) - a ] / \| f ( s ) - a \|$ The map g induces, via the standard quotient map $p : I  s ^ { 1 }$ ，a continuous map $\pmb { h } : \bar { \pmb { S } } ^ { 1 }  \pmb { S } ^ { 1 }$ Show that ${ \pmb n } ( f , { \pmb a } )$ equals the degree of h,as defined in Exercise 9 of \$58.

2. This exercise assumes some familiarity with analysis on manifold.

Theorem.Let C be a simple closed curve in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \bar { 2 } }$ that is a smooth submanifold of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ :let $f : I \to C$ bea simple loop smoothly parameterizing C. If0 is a point of the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ ,then $n ( f , \mathbf { 0 } ) = \pm 1$

Proof.Let U be the bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ Let B bea closed ∈-ball centered at O that lies in U; let ${ \pmb S } = { \pmb B } { \pmb d } { \pmb B }$ .Let M equal the closure of $U - B$

(a) Show M is a smooth 2-manifold with boundary C U S.

(b）Apply Green's theorem to show that $\textstyle \int _ { C } d z / z = \pm \int _ { S } d z / z$ ,the sign depending on the orentations of S and C.[Hint: Set $\bar { P ^ { \mathrm { ~ } } } = - y / ( x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } )$ and $Q ^ { - } = x / ( x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } ) . 1$

(c） Show that the second integral equals $\pm 2 \pi i$