Chapter 10

# Separation Theorems in the Plane

There are several difficult questions concerning the topology of the plane that arise quite naturally in the study of analysis. The answers to these questions seem geometrically quite obvious but turn out to be surprisingly hard to prove.They include the Jordan curve theorem,the Brouwer theorem on invariance of domain,and the classical theorem that the winding number of a simple closed curve is zero $o \mathbf { r } \pm 1$ We prove them in this chapter as consequences of our study of covering spaces and the fundamental group

## \$61 The Jordan Separation Theorem

We consider first one of the classical theorems of mathematics,the Jordan curve theorem. It states a fact that is geometrically quite believable,the fact that a simple closed curve in the plane always separates the plane into two pieces,its “inside"and its “outside."It was originally conjectured in 1892 by Camille Jordan,and several incorrect proofs were published, including one by Jordan himself. Eventually,a correct proof was provided by Oswald Veblen, in l905.The early proofs were complicated,but over the years,simpler proofs have been found. If one uses the tools of modern algebraic topology, singular homology theory in particular,the proof is quite straightforward. The proof we give here is the simplest one we know that uses only results from the theory of covering spaces and the fundamental group.

Our proof of the Jordan curve theorem divides into three parts. The first,which we call the Jordan separation theorem, states that a simple closed curve in the plane separates it into at least two components.The second says that an arc in the plane does not separate the plane. And the third,the Jordan curve theorem proper,says that asimple closed curve C in the plane separates it into precisely two components,of which C is the common boundary.The first of these theorems will be treated in this section.

In dealing with separation theorems,it will often be convenient to formulate them as separation theorems for subsets of $s ^ { 2 }$ rather than $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ．The separation theorems for $\bar { \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } }$ will follow. The connection between the two sets of theorems is provided by the following lemma.

Recall that if b is any point of $s ^ { 2 }$ ,there is a homeomorphism h of $s ^ { 2 } - b$ with $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ; one simply takes a rotation of $s ^ { 2 }$ that carries b to the north pole,and fol lows it by stereographic projection.

Lemma 61.1. Let C be a compact subspace of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ ：let bbeapoint of $s ^ { 2 } - c$ and let h be a homeomorphism of $S ^ { 2 } { - } b$ with $\mathbb { R } ^ { \bar { 2 } }$ .Suppose U is acomponent of $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - C$ IfU does not contain b,then $h ( U )$ Is a bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - h ( C )$ . If U contains b, then $\pmb { h } ( U - \pmb { b } )$ is the unbounded component of $\bar { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 } - h ( C )$

In particular, $i f S ^ { 2 } - C$ has n components,then $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - h ( C )$ has n components.

Proof.We show first that if U is a component of ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb C }$ ,then ${ \pmb U } - { \pmb b }$ is connected. This result is trivial if $b \notin U$ ,so suppose that $b \in U$ and suppose the sets A and B form a separation of ${ \pmb U } - { \pmb b }$ .Choose a neighborhood W of b disjoint from C such that W is homeomorphic to an open ball of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ Since W is connected,it is contained in U; since ${ \pmb W } - { \pmb b }$ is connected,it is contained entirely in Aor in B.Say $w - b \subset A$ Then b is not a limit point of B,for W is a neighborhood of b disjoint from B.It follows that the sets $A \cup \{ b \}$ and B form a separation of U,contrary to hypothesis.

Let $\{ U _ { \alpha } \}$ be the set of components of $s ^ { 2 } { - } C ;$ let $V _ { \alpha } = h ( \boldsymbol { U } _ { \alpha } - \boldsymbol { b } )$ . Because $s ^ { 2 } { - } c$ is locally connected,the sets $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ are connected,disjoint,open subsets of $s ^ { 2 }$ .Therefore, the sets $\pmb { V _ { \alpha } }$ are connected,disjoint,open subsets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - h ( C )$ ,so the sets $\pmb { V _ { \alpha } }$ are the components of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - h ( C )$

Now the homeomorphism h of $S ^ { 2 } - b \ \mathrm { w i t h } \ \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ can be extended to a homeomorphism H of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ with the one-point compactification $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \cup \{ \infty \}$ of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ , merely by setting $H ( b ) = \infty$ if $U _ { \beta }$ is the component of $\bar { s } ^ { 2 } - C$ containingb,then $H ( U _ { \beta } )$ is a neighborhood of o in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \cup \{ \infty \}$ .Therefore $V _ { \beta }$ is unbounded; since its complement $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - V _ { \beta }$ is compact,all the other components of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - h ( C )$ are bounded. See Figure 61.1．■

Lemma 61.2 (Nulhomotopy lemma). Let a and b be points of $s ^ { 2 }$ Let A be a compact space,and let

$$
f : A \longrightarrow S ^ { 2 } - a - b
$$

be a continuous map.If a and b lie in the same component of $S ^ { 2 } - f ( A )$ ，then f is nulhomotopic.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 61.1

Proof.One can replace $s ^ { 2 }$ by the one-point compactification $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \cup \{ \infty \}$ of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,letting a and b correspond to the points O and oo. Then our lemma reduces to the following: Let A be a compact space and let $g : A  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ be a continuous map. If O lies in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - g ( A )$ ,then g is nulhomotopic.

This statement is easy to prove. Choose a ball B centered at the orgin,of sufficiently large radius that it contains the set $g ( A )$ . Choose a point $\pmb { p }$ of $\bar { \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } }$ lying outside B.Then O and $p$ both lie in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - g ( A )$

Because $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is locally path connected,so is the open set $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - g ( A )$ . Therefore, the components and path components of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - g ( A )$ are the same.Hence we can choose a path α in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - g ( A )$ from $\mathbf { 0 }$ 0 $\pmb { p }$ We define a homotopy $G : A \times I \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ by the equation

$$
\boldsymbol { G } ( \boldsymbol { x } , t ) = \boldsymbol { g } ( \boldsymbol { x } ) - \boldsymbol { \alpha } ( t ) ;
$$

it is pictured in Figure 61.2. The homotopy G is a homotopy between the map g and the map k defined by ${ \pmb k } ( { \pmb x } ) = { \pmb g } ( { \pmb x } ) - { \pmb p }$ Note that $G ( x , t ) \neq \mathbf { 0 }$ because the path α does not intersect the set $g ( A )$

Now we define a homotopy H : $A \times I  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ by the equation

$$
H ( x , t ) = t g ( x ) - p .
$$

It is a homotopy between the map k and a constant map. Note that $H ( x , t ) \neq 0$ because $t g ( x )$ lies inside the ball B and p does not.

Thus we have proved that g is nulhomotopic.

Now we prove the Jordan separation theorem. In general, if X is a connected space and $\boldsymbol { A } \subset \boldsymbol { X }$ ,we saythat A separates X if $X - A$ is not connected;if $X - A$ has n components,we say that A separates X into n components.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 61.2

An arc A is a space homeomorphic to the unit interval [O,1]. The end points of A are the two points p and $\pmb q$ of A such that $A - p$ and $\pmb { A } - \pmb { q }$ are connected; the other points of A are called interior points of A.

A simple closed curve is a space homeomorphic to the unit circle $s ^ { \mathfrak { t } }$

Theorem 61.3 (The Jordan separation theorem). Let C be a simple closed curve in $s ^ { 2 }$ . Then C separates $s ^ { 2 }$

Proof.Because $s ^ { 2 } - c$ is locally path connected,its components and path components are the same.We assume that $s ^ { 2 } – C$ is path connected and derive a contradiction.

Let us write C as the union of two arcs $A _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { A } _ { 2 }$ that intersect only in their end points a and b.Let X denote the space $S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ Let $\boldsymbol { U }$ be the open set $S ^ { 2 } - A _ { 1 }$ of $\pmb { \chi }$ ,and let V be the open set $S ^ { 2 } - A _ { 2 }$ . Then X is the union of the sets $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ and V,and

$$
U \cap V = S ^ { 2 } - ( A _ { 1 } \cup A _ { 2 } ) = S ^ { 2 } - C ,
$$

which by hypothesis is path connected Thus the hypotheses of Theorem 59.l are satisfied.

Let $x _ { 0 }$ be a point of $U \cap V$ .We will show that the inclusions

$$
i : ( U , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \mathrm { a n d } j \cdot ( V , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow ( X , x _ { 0 } )
$$

induce trivial homomorphisms of the fundamental groups involved. It then follows from Theorem 59.1 that the group $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is trivial. But $X = S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ ,which is homeomorphic to the punctured plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ ,so its fundamental group is not trivial.

Let us prove that $i _ { \ast }$ is the trivial homomorphism; given a loop $f : I  U$ based at $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ ,we show that $i _ { * } ( [ f ] )$ Is trivial.For this purpose,let $p : I  S ^ { 1 }$ be the standard loop generating $\pi _ { 1 } ( \boldsymbol { S } ^ { 1 } , b _ { 0 } )$ ). The map $f \cdot I \to U$ induces a continuous map $h : S ^ { 1 } \to$ U such that h o $p = f$ . See Figure 61.3.

Consider the map ioh. $S ^ { 1 } \to S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ 、By hypothesis,the set $i ( h ( S ^ { 1 } ) ) = h ( S ^ { 1 } )$ does not intersect the connected set $\pmb { A } _ { 1 }$ containing a and b. Therefore,a and b lie in the same component of $S ^ { 2 } - i ( h ( S ^ { 1 } ) )$ ．By the preceding lemma,the map io h is nulhomotopic.It follows from Lemma 55.3 that $( i \circ h )$ \*is the trivial homomorphism of fundamental groups.But

$$
( i \circ h ) _ { * } ( [ p ] ) = [ i \circ h \circ p ] = [ i \circ f ] = i _ { * } ( [ f ] ) .
$$

Therefore, $i _ { * } ( [ f ] )$ is trivial,as desired.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 61.3

Let us examine the preceding proof. What facts did we use about the simple closed curve $c ?$ All we actually needed was the fact that $c$ could be written as the union of the two closed connected sets $A _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { A } _ { 2 }$ ，whose intersection consisted of the two points a and b.This remark leads to the following generalized version of the separation theorem,which will be useful later.

Theorem 61.4 (A general separation theorem). Let $\pmb { A } _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { A } _ { 2 }$ be closed connected subsets of $s ^ { 2 }$ whose intersection consists of precisely two points a and b.Then the set $C = A _ { 1 } \cup A _ { 2 }$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$

Proof.We must show first that C cannot equal all of $s ^ { 2 }$ .That fact was obvious in the earlier proof. In the present case,we can see that $c \neq s ^ { 2 }$ because $S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ is connected and $C - a - b$ is not. (The sets $\pmb { A } _ { i } - \pmb { a } - \pmb { b }$ form a separation of $C - a - b . )$

The remainder of the proof is a copy of the proof of the preceding theorem.

## Exercises

1. Give examples to show that a simple closed curve in the torus may or may not separate the torus.

2. Let A be the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ consisting of the union of the topologist's sine curve and the broken-line path from $( 0 , - 1 )$ to (0,-2) to (1,-2) to (1,sin l). See Figure 61.4. We call A the closed topologist's sine curve. Show that if C is a subspace of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ homeomorphic to the closed topologist's sine curve, then $c$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 61.4

## \*\$62 Invariance of Domain+

One of the theorems of topology that is truly fundamental, because it expresses an intrinsic property of euclidean space,is the theorem on “invariance of domain," proved byL.E.j. Brouwer in 1912 It states that for any open set U of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ and any continuous injective mapping $f : U \to \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ , the image set $f ( U )$ is open in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ and the inverse function is continuous.(The Inverse Function Theorem of analysis derives this result under the additional hypothesis that the map f is continuously differentiable with nonsingular Jacobian matrix.） We shall prove this theorem in the case $\pmb { n } = 2$

Lemma 62.1 (Homotopy extension lemma). Let X be a space such that $X \times I$ is normal.Let A be a closed subspace of X,and let $f : A \to Y$ be a continuous map, where Y is an open subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ .If f is nulhomotopic,then f may be extended to a continuous map $g : X \to Y$ that is also nulhomotopic.

Proof. Let $F : A \times I \to Y$ be a homotopy between f and a constant map. Then $F ( a , 0 ) = f ( a )$ and $F ( a , 1 ) = y _ { 0 }$ for all a.Extend F to the space $X \times 1$ by setting $F ( x , 1 ) = y _ { 0 }$ for $x \in { \pmb X }$ Then F is a continuous map of the closed subspace $( A \times$ $I ) \cup ( X \times 1 )$ of $X \times I$ into $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ; by the Tietze extension theorem, it may be extended to a continuous map $G : X \times I \to \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$

Now the map $x \to G ( x , 0 )$ is an extension of f,but it maps X into $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ rather than into the subspace Y To obtain our desired map,we proceed as follows: Let U be the open subset $U = G ^ { - 1 } ( Y )$ of $X \times I$ Then U contains $( A \times I ) \cup ( X \times 1 )$ . See Figure 62.1. Since/ is compact,the tube lemma implies that there is an open set W of X containing A such that $w \times I \subset U$ ．Now the space X is itself normal,being homeomorphic to the closed subspace $X \times 0$ of $X \times I$ .Therefore,we may choose a continuous function $\phi : X  [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $\phi ( { \pmb x } ) = 0$ for $x \in A$ and $\phi ( { \pmb x } ) = 1$ for $x \in X - W$ . The map $x \to x \times \phi ( x )$ carries X into the subspace $( W \times I ) \cup ( X \times 1 )$ of $X \times I ,$ 、which lies in U. Then the continuous map $g ( x ) = G ( x , \phi ( x ) )$ carries X into Y. And for $x \in A$ ,we have $\phi ( { \pmb x } ) = 0 .$ so that $g ( x ) = G ( x , 0 ) = f ( x )$ . Thus g is the desired extension of f. The map $\pmb { H } : \pmb { X } \times \pmb { I }  \pmb { Y }$ given by

$$
H ( x , t ) = G ( x , ( 1 - t ) \phi ( x ) + t )
$$

is a homotopy between g and a constant map.

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Figure 62.1

The following lemma is a partial converse to the nulhomotopy lemma of the preceding section.

Lemma 62.2 (Borsuk lemma). Let a and b be points of $s ^ { 2 }$ . Let A be a compact space,and let $f : A \to S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ be a continuous injective map. If f is nulhomotopic, then a and b lie in the same component of $S ^ { 2 } - f ( { \cal { A } } )$

Proof.Because A is compact and $s ^ { 2 }$ is Hausdorff, $f ( A )$ is a compact subspace of $\displaystyle s ^ { 2 }$ that is homeomorphic to A. Because f is nulhomotopic,so is the inclusion mapping of $f ( A )$ into $S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ Hence it suffices to prove the lemma in the special case where f is simply an inclusion map.Furthermore,we can replace $s ^ { 2 }$ by $\mathbb { R } ^ { \hat { 2 } } \cup \{ \infty \}$ , letting a correspond to 0,and b to oo .Then our lemma reduces to the following statement:

Let A be a compact subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 } .$ If the inclusion $j : A \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \bullet$ is nulhomotopic,then O lies in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \overset { } { A }$

This we now prove.Let C be the component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - A$ containing O;we suppose C is bounded and derive a contradiction. Let D be the union of the other components of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - A$ ,including the unbounded component. Then C and D are disjoint open sets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,and $ { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 } - A \bumpeq C \cup D$ See Figure 62.2.

We define a continuous map $\pmb { h } : \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 }$ that equals the identity outside C. Begin with the inclusion map $j : A \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \bullet$ Since j is by hypothesis nulhomotopic,the preceding lemma implies that j can be extended to a continuous map k of $c \cup A$ into $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ Then k equals the identity at points of A.Extend k to a map $\pmb { h } : \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 }$ by setting $h ( x ) = x$ for $x \in D \cup A$ ,then h is continuous by the pasting lemma.

Now we derive a contradiction.Let B be the closed ball in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ of radius M centered at the origin,where M is so large that Int B contains C U A.(Here,we use the fact that C is bounded.) If we restrict h to B,we obtain a map $g : B  \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ such that $g ( x ) = x$ forx∈ BdB.Ifwe follow gbythe standard retraction $x  M x / \| x \|$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbb { 0 }$ onto Bd B,we obtain a retraction of B onto Bd B.Such a retractiori does not exist. ■

<!-- image-->  
Figure 62.2

Theorem 62.3 (Invariance of domain). If U is an open subset of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and $f : U \to$ $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is continuous and injectve,then $f ( U )$ is open in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and the inverse function $f ^ { - 1 } : f ( U ) \to U$ is continuous.

Proof.As usual, we can replace $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ by $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ .We show that if U is an open subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and $f : U \to S ^ { 2 }$ is continuous and injective,then $f ( U )$ is open in $s ^ { \dot { 2 } }$ and the inverse function is continuous.

Step 1.We show that if B is any closed ball in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ contained in U,then $f ( B )$ does not separate $s ^ { 2 }$

Let a and b be two points of $S ^ { 2 } - f ( B )$ . Because the identity map $i : B \to B$ is nulhomotopic,the map $h : B  S ^ { 2 } - a - b$ obtained by restricting f is nulhomotopic. The Borsuk lemma then implies that a and b lie in the same component of $\begin{array} { r l r } { S ^ { 2 } - h ( B ) } & { { } = } & { } \end{array}$ $S ^ { 2 } - f ( B )$ ·

Step 2.We show that if B isany closed ball f $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ lying in U,then f(Int B) is open in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$

The space $C = f ( \ B { \bf { B } } { \bf { d } } \ B )$ is a simple closed curve in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ , so it separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ Let V be the component of $s ^ { 2 } - c$ that contains the connected set $f ( \mathop { \mathrm { I n t } } B )$ ,and let W be the union of the others.Because $s ^ { 2 }$ is locally connected, V and W are open in $s ^ { 2 }$ We show $V = f ( \operatorname { I n t } B )$ ,and we are through.

We suppose a is a point of V that is not in f(Int B) and derive a contradiction. Let b be a point of W. Since the set $D = f ( B )$ does not separate $s ^ { 2 }$ ,the set $s ^ { 2 } - D$ is a connected set containing a and b.This set is contained in $s ^ { 2 } - c$ (since $D \supset C )$ it follows that a and b lie in the same component of ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb C }$ ,contrary to construction. See Figure 62.3.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 62.3  
Step 3. We prove the theorem. Since, for any ball B contained in U,the set f(Int B)is open in $s ^ { 2 }$ ,the map $f : U \to S ^ { 2 }$ is an open map. It follows that $f ( U )$ is open in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ and $f ^ { - 1 }$ is continuous. ■

## Exercises

1.Give an example to show that the conclusion of the Borsuk lemma need not hold if f is not injective.

2. Let A be a compact contractible subspace of $\displaystyle { \mathfrak { S } } ^ { 2 }$ Show that A does not separate $s ^ { 2 }$

3.Let X be a space such that $X \times I$ is normal. Let A be a closed subspace of X; let $f : A \to Y$ be a continuous map,where Y is an open subspace of R".If f is homotopic to a map that is extendable to acontinuous map $h : X \to Y$ then f itself is extendable to a continuous map $g : X \to Y$ ,such that $g \simeq h$

4.Let C be a simple closed curve in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 } ;$ let $j : C \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 }$ be the inclusion mapping. Show that $j _ { \ast }$ is trivial if O lies in the unbounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ and is nontrivial otherwise.(In fact,j. is an isomorphism in the later case,as we shall prove in \$65.)

5.Theorem. Let U be a simply connected open set in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ $_ { t c }$ is a simple closed curve lying in U,then each bounded component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ also lies in U .

(This condition actually characterizes the simply connected open sets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ See [RW]. The space $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - C$ has,of course,only one bounded component, as we shall prove in the next section.)

6. Suppose you are given that there is no retraction of $B ^ { n }$ onto $S ^ { n - 1 }$

(a） Show the Borsuk lemma holds for $s ^ { n }$

(b） Show that no compact contractible subspace of ${ \pmb S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ separates $s ^ { n }$

(c） Suppose you are given also that any subspace of ${ \pmb S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ homeomorph ic to $\displaystyle S ^ { n - 1 }$ separates $\pmb { S ^ { n } }$ . Prove the invariance of domain theorem in dimension n.

## \$63The Jordan Curve Theorem

The special case of the Seifert-van Kampen theorem that we used in proving the Jordan separation theorem tells us something about the fundamental group of the space $\pmb { \chi } =$ $U \cup V$ in the case where the intersection $U \cap V$ is path connected.In the next theorem, we examine what happens when $U \cap V$ is not path connected. This result will enable us to complete the proof of the Jordan curve theorem.

Theorem 63.1. Let X be the union of two open sets U and V,such that $U \cap V$ can be writen as the union of two disjoint open sets A and B. Assume that there is a path α in U from a point a of A to a point b of B,and that there is a path $\beta$ in V from $^ { b }$ to a. Let f be the loop $\boldsymbol { f } = \boldsymbol { \alpha } * \boldsymbol { \beta }$

(a) The path-homotopy class[fl generates an infinite cyclic subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$

\*(b) $I f \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ is itself infinite cyclic,it is generatedby $[ f ] .$ +

(c)Assume there is a path γ in U from a to the point ${ \pmb a } ^ { \prime }$ of A,and that there is a path δ in V from $\pmb { a } ^ { \prime }$ to a.Let g be the loop $g = \gamma * \delta$ .Then the subgroups of $\pi _ { \mathfrak { i } } ( X , a )$ generated by[f] and [g] intersect in the identity element alone.

ProofThe proof is in many ways an imitation of the proof in \$54 that the fundamental group of the circle is infinite cyclic.As in that proof,the crucial step is to find an appropriate covering space E for the space X.

Step l.(Construction of E).We construct E by pasting together copies of the subspaces U and V. Let us take countably many copies of U and countably many copies of V,all disjoint,say

$$
U \times ( 2 n ) \mathrm { a n d } V \times ( 2 n + 1 )
$$

for all $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } ,$ ，where Z denotes the integers. Let Y denote the union of these spaces; Y is a subspace of $x \times \mathbb { Z }$ Now we form a new space E as a quotient space of Y by

identifying the points

$$
x \times ( 2 n ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad x \times ( 2 n - 1 ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } x \in A
$$

and by identifying the points

$$
x \times ( 2 n ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad x \times ( 2 n + 1 ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } x \in B .
$$

Let $\pi : Y  E$ be the quotient map.

Now the map $\rho : Y  X$ defined by $\rho ( x \times m ) = x$ induces a map $p : E \to X$ the map p is continuous because E has the quotient topology. The map p is also surjective.We shallshow that p is a covering map. See Figure 63.1.

First let us show that the map π is an open map. Since Y is the union of the disjoint open sets $\{ U \times ( 2 n ) \}$ and $\{ V \times ( 2 n + 1 ) \}$ ,it will suffice to show that $\pi | ( U \times 2 n )$ and $\pi \lvert ( V \times ( 2 n + 1 ) )$ are open maps. And this is easy. Take an open set in $U \times 2 n$ ,for example; it will be of the form $W \times 2 n$ ,where Wis open inU.Then

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { \pi ^ { - 1 } ( \pi ( W \times 2 n ) ) = \left[ W \times 2 n \right] \cup [ ( W \cap B ) \times ( 2 n + 1 ) ] } } \\ { { \cup ~ [ ( W \cap A ) \times ( 2 n - 1 ) ] , } } \end{array}
$$

which is the union of three open sets of Y and hence open in Y.By definition of the quotient topology, $\pi ( W \times 2 n )$ is open in E,as desired.

Now we prove that p is a covering map; we show that the open sets U and V are evenly covered by p.Consider U,for example. The set $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is the union of the disjoint sets $\pi ( U \times 2 n )$ for $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z }$ Each of these sets is open in E because π is an open map.Let $\pi _ { 2 n }$ denote the restriction of π to the open set $U \times 2 n$ ,mapping it onto $\pi ( U \times 2 n )$ ． It is a homeomorphism because it is bijective,continuous,and open.Then when restrlcted to $\pi ( U \times 2 n )$ ,the map p is just the composite of the two homeomorphisms

$$
\pi ( U \times 2 n ) \xrightarrow { \pi _ { 2 n } ^ { - 1 } } U \times 2 n - \int \limits _ { 0 } ^ { \infty } U
$$

and is thus a homeomorphism. Therefore, $p | \pi ( U \times 2 n )$ maps this set homeomorphically onto U,as desired.

$\boldsymbol { f } = \boldsymbol { \alpha } * \boldsymbol { \beta } .$

For each integer n,let $\ell _ { n }$ be the point $\pi ( { \pmb a } \times 2 { \pmb n } )$ of E．Then the points $e _ { n }$ are distinct,and they constitute the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( a )$ . We define a lifting $\tilde { f } _ { n }$ of $f$ that begins at $e _ { n }$ and ends at $e _ { n + 1 }$

Since α and $\pmb { \beta }$ are paths in U and V,respectively, we can define

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \bar { \alpha } _ { n } ( s ) = \pi ( \alpha ( s ) \times 2 n ) , } } \\ { { \bar { \beta } _ { n } ( s ) = \pi ( \beta ( s ) \times ( 2 n + 1 ) ) ; } } \end{array}
$$

then $\tilde { \alpha } _ { n }$ and ${ \bar { \pmb { \beta } } } _ { n }$ are liftings of α and $\pmb { \beta } .$ ,respectively. (The case $\pmb { n = 0 }$ is illustrated in Figure 63.1） The product $\bar { \alpha } _ { n } * \bar { \beta } _ { n }$ is defined, since $\tilde { \alpha } _ { n }$ ends at $\pi ( \boldsymbol { b } \times 2 \boldsymbol { n } )$ and ${ \tilde { \beta } } _ { n }$ begins at

<!-- image-->  
Figure 63.1

$\pi ( b \times ( 2 n + 1 ) )$ . We set $\tilde { f } _ { n } = \tilde { \alpha } _ { n } { * \tilde { \beta } _ { n } }$ , and note that $\bar { f } _ { n }$ begins at $\bar { \alpha } _ { n } ( 0 ) = \pi ( a \times 2 n ) = e _ { n }$ and ends at $\bar { \beta } _ { n } ( 1 ) = \pi ( a \times ( 2 n + 1 ) ) = \pi ( a \times ( 2 n + 2 ) ) = e _ { n + 1 } .$

Step 3.We show that[f] generates an infinite cyclic subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ It suffices to show that if m is a positive integer, then $[ f ] ^ { m }$ is not the identity element. But this is easy.For the product

$$
\tilde { h } = \bar { f } _ { 0 } * ( \bar { f } _ { 1 } * ( \cdot \cdot \cdot * \breve { f } _ { m - 1 } ) )
$$

is defined and is a lifting of the m-fold product

$$
h = f * ( f * ( \cdot \cdot \cdot * f ) ) .
$$

Because $\bar { h }$ begins at $_ { e _ { 0 } }$ and ends at $e _ { m }$ ,the class $[ h ] = [ f ] ^ { m }$ cannot be trivial.

\*Step 4. Now we show that if $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ is infinite cyclic, it is generated by $[ f ]$ Consider the lifting correspondence $\phi : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a ) \to p ^ { - 1 } ( a )$ .We showed in Step 3 that for each positive integer m,the correspondence $\phi$ carries $[ f ] ^ { m }$ to the point $e _ { m }$ of $p ^ { - 1 } ( a )$ .A similar argument shows that it carries $[ f ] ^ { - m }$ to $e - m$ . Thus $\phi$ is surjective. Now by Theorem 54.6, $\phi$ induces an injective map

$$
\Phi : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a ) / H \longrightarrow p ^ { - 1 } ( a ) ,
$$

where $H = p _ { * } ( \pi _ { 1 } ( E , e _ { 0 } ) )$ ; the map $\Phi$ is surjective because $\phi$ is surjective. It follows that H is the trivial group,since the quotient of an infinite cyclic group by any nontrivial subgroup is finite.Then the lifting correspondence $\phi$ itself is bijective； since it maps the subgroup generated by[f] onto $p ^ { - 1 } ( a )$ ,this subgroup must equal all of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$

Step 5. Now we prove (c). The picture in Figure 63.1 may mislead you into thinking that the element [g]of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ considered in part (c) is in fact trivial.But that figure is rather special． Figure 63.2 illustrates what can occur when A is itself the union of two disjoint nonempty open sets. In this case (which willbe useful to us shortly) both [f] and [g] generate infinite cyclic subgroups of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 63.2

Given $g = \gamma * \delta$ ,we define a lifting of g to E as follows: Since y is a path in U, we can define

$$
\tilde { \gamma } ( s ) = \pi ( \gamma ( s ) \times 0 ) ;
$$

since $\pmb { \delta }$ is a path in V, we can define

$$
\tilde { \delta } ( s ) = \pi ( \delta ( s ) \times ( - 1 ) ) .
$$

Then $\tilde { \gamma }$ and $\bar { \pmb \delta }$ are liftings of yandδ.The product $\bar { g } = \bar { \gamma } * \tilde { \delta }$ is defined, since $\tilde { \gamma }$ ends at $\pi ( a ^ { \prime } \times 0 )$ and $\tilde { \pmb { \delta } }$ begins at $\pi ( a ^ { \prime } \times ( - 1 ) )$ ;and it is a lifting of g. Note that $\bar { \pmb g }$ is a loop in E,for it begins and ends at j $\tau ( a \times 0 ) = \pi ( a \times ( - 1 ) ) = e _ { 0 }$

It follows that the subgroups generated by[f] and [g] have only the identity element in common. For the m-fold product of f with itself lifts to a path that begins at $e _ { 0 }$ and ends at $\ell _ { m }$ ,while every product of $\pmb { g }$ with itself lifts to a path beginning and ending at ${ \pmb e } _ { 0 }$ . Hence $[ f ] ^ { m } \neq [ g ] ^ { k }$ for every nonzero m and k.

Theorem 63.2 (A nonseparation theorem). Let D be an arc in ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 }$ . Then D does not separate $s ^ { 2 }$

ProofWe give two proofs ofthis theorem. The first uses theresultsof the preceding section,and the second does not.

First proof. Because D is contractible,the identity map i $: D  D$ is nulhomotopic.Hence if a and $^ { b }$ are any two points of $s ^ { 2 }$ not in D,the inclusion $j : D $ $S ^ { \bar { 2 } } - a - b$ is nulhomotopic.The Borsuk lemma then implies that $\pmb { a }$ and $^ { \pmb { b } }$ lie in the same component of $s ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { \bar { \rho } } D$

Second Proof.Let us write D as the union of two arcs $D _ { 1 }$ and $D _ { 2 }$ that intersect in a single point d. Let $^ { a }$ and b be points not in $\pmb { D }$ .We show that if a and b car be joined by paths in $S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 1 }$ and in $S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 2 }$ ,then they can be joined by a path in $s ^ { 2 } - D$ Figure 63.3 illustrates the fact that this assertion is not entirely trivial.

<!-- image-->

We suppose that a and b cannot be joined by a path in $\mathbb { S } ^ { 2 } - D$ and derive a contradiction. We apply Theorem 63.1. Let X be the space $s ^ { 2 } - { \mathfrak { d } } .$ Let U and V be the open sets

$$
U = S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 1 } \mathrm { a n d } V = S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 2 } .
$$

Then $X = U \cup V$ ,and $U \cap V = S ^ { 2 } - D$ .By hypothesis,a and b are points of $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { D }$ that cannot be joined by a path in $\mathbb { S } ^ { 2 } - D$ .Therefore, $U \cap V$ is not path connected.

Let A be the path component of $U \cap V$ Containing a; let B be the union of the other path components of $U \cap V$ . Since $U \cap V$ is locally path connected (being open in $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } )$ the path components of $U \cap V$ are open; hence A and B are open in X. We are given that a and b can be joined by paths in $U = { { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 2 } } - D _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { V } = \hat { S } ^ { 2 } - D _ { 2 }$ .We conclude from Theorem 63.1that $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ is not trivial.But $X = \bar { s } ^ { 2 } - d$ ,so its fundamental group is trivial.

Now we prove the theorem Given the arc D and the points a and b of $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { D }$ we suppose that a and b cannot be joined by a path in $\bar { s } ^ { 2 } - D$ and derive a contradiction. Choose a homeomorphism $h : [ 0 , 1 ] \to D ^ { \cdot }$ let $D _ { 1 } = h ( [ 0 , 1 / 2 ] )$ and $D _ { 2 } = h ( [ 1 / 2 , 1 ] )$ .The result of the preceding paragraph shows that since a and b cannot be joined by a path in $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { D }$ ,they cannot be joined by paths in both $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - D _ { 1 }$ and $S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 2 }$ .To be definite,suppose that a and b cannot be joined by a path in $S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 1 }$ ·

Now repeat the argument, breaking $D _ { 1 }$ up into two arcs $E _ { 1 } = h ( [ 0 , 1 / 4 ] )$ and $E _ { 2 } = h ( [ 1 / 4 , 1 / 2 ] )$ .We conclude,as before,that a and $\pmb { b }$ cannot be joined by paths in both $S ^ { 2 } - E _ { 1 }$ and $S ^ { 2 } - E _ { 2 }$

Contnue similarly.In this way we define a sequence

$$
I \supset I _ { 1 } \supset I _ { 2 } \supset \cdots
$$

of closed intervals such that $I _ { n }$ has length $( 1 / 2 ) ^ { n }$ and such that for each n,the points a and b cannot be joined by a path in $S ^ { 2 } - h ( I _ { n } )$ ．Compactness of the unit interval guarantees there is a point x in $\cap I _ { n }$ ； since the lengths of the intervals converge to zero,there is only one such point.

Consider the space $S ^ { 2 } { - } h ( x )$ . Since this space is homeomorphic to $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,the points a and b can be joined by a path α in $S ^ { 2 } - h ( x )$ Because ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( I )$ is compact, it is closed, so some ∈-neighborhood of h(x) is disjoint from ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( I )$ .Then because h is continuous, there is some m such that h(Im) lies in this ∈-neighborhood.It follows that α is a path in $S ^ { 2 } - h ( I _ { m } )$ joining a and b,contrary to hypothesis.

Both proofs of this theorem are interesting. As we noted in S62,the first generalizes to show that no compact contractible subspace of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$ .The second generalizes in another direction. Let us examine this second proof,and ask ourselves what properties of the sets $D _ { 1 }$ and $D _ { 2 }$ made it work? One readily sees that allthat was needed was the factthat $D _ { 1 }$ and $D _ { 2 }$ were closed subsets of $s ^ { 2 }$ and that $S ^ { 2 } - ( D _ { 1 } \cap D _ { 2 } )$ was simply connected.Hence we have the following result,which we shall use later:

Theorem 63.3 (A general nonseparation theorem). Let $D _ { 1 }$ and $D _ { 2 }$ be closed subsets $\ o f \bar { S } ^ { 2 }$ such that $S ^ { 2 } - D _ { 1 } \cap D _ { 2 }$ is simply connected.If neither $D _ { 1 }$ nor $D _ { 2 }$ separates $\textstyle { s ^ { 2 } }$ ，then $D _ { 1 } \cup D _ { 2 }$ does not separate $\displaystyle s ^ { 2 }$

Now we prove the Jordan curve theorem.

Theorem 63.4 (The Jordan curve theorem). Let C be a simple closed curve in $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ Then C separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into precisely two components ${ \pmb W } _ { \parallel }$ and $w _ { 2 }$ .Each of the sets $w _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb W } _ { 2 }$ has C as its boundary; that is, $C = \overline { { W } } _ { i } - W _ { i }$ fori = 1,2.

Proof.Step 1.We first prove that ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb C }$ has precisely two components. Write C as the union of two arcs $C _ { 1 }$ and $c _ { 2 }$ that intersect in a two-point set $\{ p , q \}$ . Let X be the space $S ^ { 2 } - p - q$ ,and let U and V be the open sets

$$
U = S ^ { 2 } - C _ { 1 } \mathrm { a n d } V = S ^ { 2 } - C _ { 2 } .
$$

Then $X = U \cup V$ ,and $U \cap V = S ^ { 2 } - C$ . The space $U \cap V$ has at least two cormponents, by the Jordan separation theorem.

We suppose that $U \cap V$ has more than two components and derive a contradiction. Let $\pmb { A } _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { A } _ { 2 }$ be two of the components of $U \cap { \mathfrak { v } }$ ，and let B be the union of the others.Because ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb C }$ is locally connected,each of these sets is open. Let $a \in A _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb a } ^ { \prime } \in \ A _ { 2 }$ and $\textit { \textbf { b } } \in \textit { \textbf { B } }$ Because the arcs $C _ { 1 }$ and $c _ { 2 }$ do not separate $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ ， there are paths α and y in U from a to b and from a to ${ \pmb a } ^ { \prime }$ ,respectively,and there are paths $\beta$ and δ in V from $^ { b }$ to a and from $\pmb { a } ^ { \prime }$ to $\pmb { a }$ ,respectively. Consider the loops $\pmb { f } = \pmb { \alpha } * \pmb { \beta }$ and $g = \gamma * \delta$ . Wnting $U \cap V$ as the union of the open sets $A _ { 1 } \cup A _ { 2 }$ and B,we see that Theorem 63.I implies that $[ f ]$ 1s a nontrivial element of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ .Writing $U \cap V$ as the union of the disjoint open sets A $\pmb { A } _ { 1 }$ and $A _ { 2 } \cup B$ ,we see that [g] is also a nontrivial element of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ . Since ${ \pi } _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ is infinite cyclic,we must have $[ f ] ^ { m } = [ g ] ^ { k }$ for some nonzero integers m and k. This result contradicts (c) of Theorem 63.1.

Step 2. Now we show that C is the common boundary of ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ and $w _ { 2 }$

Because $s ^ { 2 }$ is locally connected,each of the components ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb W } _ { 2 }$ of $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - C$ is open in $s ^ { 2 }$ .In particular, neither contains a limit point of the other,so that both the sets $\overline { { \pmb { W } } } _ { 1 } - \pmb { W } _ { 1 }$ and $\overline { { \boldsymbol { W } } } _ { 2 } - \boldsymbol { W } _ { 2 }$ must be contained in C.

To prove the reverse inclusion,we show that if x is a point of $c ,$ every neighborhood U of x intersects the closed set $\overline { { \boldsymbol { W } } } _ { 1 } - \boldsymbol { W } _ { 1 }$ . It follows that x is in the set $\overline { { \pmb { W } } } _ { 1 } - \pmb { W } _ { 1 }$

So let U be a neighborhood of x. Because C is homeomorphic to the circle $s ^ { 1 }$ ,we can break C up into two arcs $c _ { 1 }$ and $c _ { 2 }$ that intersect in only their end points,such that $C _ { 1 }$ is small enough that it lies inside U. See Figure 63.4.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 63.4

Let a and b be points of $W _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb W } _ { 2 }$ ,respectively.Because $c _ { 2 }$ does not separate $s ^ { 2 }$ we can find a path α in $S ^ { 2 } - C _ { 2 }$ joining aand b.The set ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( I )$ must contain a point y of the set $\overline { { \pmb { W } } } _ { 1 } - \pmb { W } _ { 1 }$ ,because otherwise α(l） would be a connected set lying in the union of the disjoint open sets ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ and $S ^ { 2 } - \overline { { W } } _ { 1 }$ ,and intersecting each of them. The point y belongs to the closed curve C,since $( \overline { { w } } _ { 1 } - w _ { 1 } ) \subset C$ 、Because the path α does not intersect the arc $C _ { 2 }$ ,the point y must therefore lie in the arc $C _ { 1 }$ ,which in turn les in the open set U.Thus,U intersects $\overline { { \pmb { W } } } _ { 1 } - \pmb { W } _ { 1 }$ in the point y,as desired. ■

Just as with the earlier theorems,we now ask ourselves what made the proof of this theorem work. Examining Step l of the proof,we see that all we used were the facts that $C _ { 1 }$ and $C _ { 2 }$ were closed connected sets,that $C _ { 1 } \cap C _ { 2 }$ consisted of two points, and that neither $c _ { 1 }$ nor $C _ { 2 }$ separated $s ^ { 2 }$ ．The first two facts implied that $C _ { 1 } \cup C _ { 2 }$ separated $s ^ { 2 }$ into at least two components;the third implied that there were only two components.Hence one has,with no further effort,the following result:

Theorem 63.5. Let $C _ { 1 }$ and $c _ { 2 }$ be closed connected subsets of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ whose intersection consists of two points. If neither $C _ { 1 }$ nor $c _ { 2 }$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$ ，then $C _ { 1 } \cup C _ { 2 }$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into precisely two components.

ExAMPLE 1．The second half of the Jordan curve theorem,to the effect that $^ { c }$ is the common boundary of ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb w } _ { 2 }$ ,may seem so obvious as hardly to require comment.But it depends crucially on the fact that C is homeomorphic to $s ^ { 1 }$

For instance,consider the space indicated in Figure 63 5. It is the union of two arcs whose intersection Consists of two points,so it separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into two components ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb w } _ { 2 }$ just as the circle does,by Theorem 63.5.But $c$ does not equal the common boundary of ${ \pmb w } _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb w } _ { 2 }$ in this case.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 63.5

There is a fourth theorem that is often considered along with these three separation theorems.It iscalled the Schoenfies theorem,and it states that if C is asimple closed curve in $s ^ { 2 }$ and $\pmb { U }$ and V are the components of $s ^ { 2 } - c$ ，then $\bar { U }$ and $\bar { v }$ are each homeomorphic to the closed unit ball $B ^ { \bar { 2 } }$ .A proof may be found in [H-S].

The separation theorems can be generalized to higher dimensions as follows:

(1）Any subspace C of ${ \pmb S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ homeomorphic to $S ^ { n - 1 }$ separates $s ^ { n }$

(2) No subspace A of $s ^ { n }$ homeomorphic to [0.1]or to someball $B ^ { m }$ separates $s ^ { n }$

(3）Any subspace $c$ of $s ^ { n }$ homeomorphic to $\ S ^ { n - 1 }$ separates $s ^ { n }$ into two cormponents, of which C is the common boundary.

These theorems can be proved quite readily once one has studied singular homology groups in algebraic topology. (See [Mu],p. 202.） The Brouwer theorem on invariance of domain for $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ follows as a corollary.

The Schoenflies theorem, however, does not generalize to higher dimens ions without some restrictions on the way the space C is imbedded in $s ^ { n }$ . This is sho wn by the famous example of the“Alexander horned sphere,"a homeomorphic image of $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ .i $s ^ { 3 }$ ， one of whose complementary domains is not simply connected! (See [H-Y],p. 176.)

The separation theorems can be generalized even further than this.The definitive theorem along these lines is the famous Alexander-Pontryagin duality theorem,a rather deep theorem of algebraic topology, which we shall not attempt to state here. (See [Mu].）It implies that if the closed subspace C separates $s ^ { n }$ into k cormponents, so does any subspace of $\pmb { S } ^ { n }$ that is homeomorphic to $c$ (or even homotopy equivalent to C).The separation theorems (l)-(3) are immediate corollaries.

## Exercises

1. Let $C _ { 1 }$ and $C _ { 2 }$ be disjoint simple closed curves in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$

(a) Show that $S ^ { 2 } - C _ { 1 } - C _ { 2 }$ has precisely three components.[Hint:If ${ \pmb W } _ { 1 }$ is the component of ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - C _ { 1 }$ disjoint from $c _ { 2 }$ and if ${ \pmb W } _ { 2 }$ is the component of $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 } - C _ { 2 } ^ { \dagger }$ disjoint from $C _ { 1 }$ , show that $\overline { { \pmb { W } } } _ { 1 } \cup \overline { { \pmb { W } } } _ { 2 }$ does not separate $s ^ { { \dot { 2 } } } .$

(b） Show that these three components have boundaries $C _ { 1 }$ and $C _ { 2 }$ and $C _ { 1 } \cup C _ { 2 }$ respectively.

2. Let D be a closed connected subspace of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ that separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ into n components.

(a)If A is an arc in $s ^ { 2 }$ whose intersection with D consists of one of its end points,show that D U A separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ into n components.

(b) If A is an arc in $s ^ { 2 }$ whose intersection with $D$ consists of its end points, show that $D \cup A$ separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ into $n + 1$ components.

(c）If C is a simple closed curve in ${ \mathfrak { s } } ^ { 2 }$ that intersects D in a single point,show $D \cup C$ separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into $n + 1$ components.

\*3.(a） Let D be a subspace of $s ^ { 2 }$ homeomorphic to the topologist's_sine curve $\bar { \pmb S } .$ (See §24.) Show that D does not separate $s ^ { 2 }$ . [Hint: Let $h : \bar { S }  D$ be the homeomorphism. Given $0 < c < 1$ ,let $\bar { s } _ { c }$ equal the intersection of $\bar { s }$ with the set $\{ ( x , y ) \mid x \leq c \}$ . Show that given a, $b \in \mathcal { S } ^ { 2 } - D$ ,there is,for some value of c,a path in $S ^ { 2 } - h ( \bar { S } _ { c } )$ from a to $\pmb { b }$ Conclude that there is a path in ${ \pmb S } ^ { 2 } - { \pmb D }$ from a to $\pmb { b . } \mathbf { l }$

(b) Let C be a subspace of $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 }$ homeomorphic to the closed topologist's sine curve. Show that C separates $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ into precisely two components,of which C is the common boundary.[Hint: Let h be the homeomorphism of the closed topologist's sine curve with C.Let $C _ { 0 } = h ( 0 \times [ - 1 , 1 ] )$ . Show first,using the argument of Theorem 63.4,that each point of $C - C _ { 0 }$ lies in the boundary of each component of $s ^ { 2 } - { \cal C } . ]$

## \$64Imbedding Graphs in the Plane

A (finite)linear graph G is a Hausdorff space that is written as the union of finitely many arcs,each pair of which intersect in at most a common end point. The arcs are called the edges of the graph,and the end points of the arcs are called the vertices of the graph.

Linear graphs are used in mathematics to model many real-life phenomena; however, we shall look at them simply as interesting spaces that in some sense are generalizations of simple closed curves.

Note that any graph is determined completely (up to homeomorphism) by listing its vertices and specifying which pairs of vertices have an edge joining them.

EXAMPLE 1．If G contains exactly n vertices,and if for every pair of distinct vertices of G there is an edge of G joining them,then G is called the complete graph on n vertices and is denoted $G _ { \pmb { \eta } }$ ：Several such graphsare pictured in Figure 64.1．Note that the first three of these graphs are pictured as subspaces of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,but the fourth is pictured instead as a subspace of ${ \bar { \mathbb { R } } } ^ { 3 }$ Alittle experimentation will convince you that this graph cannot in fact be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ We shall prove this result shortly.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 64.1  
EXAMPLE 2．Another interesting graph arises in considering the classical puzzle: "Given three houses, $\pmb { h } _ { 1 } , \pmb { h } _ { 2 }$ and $h _ { 3 }$ ,and three utilities,g (for gas),w (for water).and $\pmb { e }$ (for electricity),can you connect each utility to each house without letting any of the connecting lines cross $i ^ { \bullet }$ Formulated mathematically,this is just the question whether the graph pictured in Figure 64.2,which is called the utilities graph.can be imbedded in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ Again, a little experimentation will convince you that it cannot,a fact that we shall prove shoruly

Definition.A theta space X is a Hausdorff space that is writen as the union of three arcs A，B,and $C ,$ ,each pair of which intersect precisely in their end points. (The space X is of course homeomorphic to the Greek letter theta.)

<!-- image-->  
Figure 64.2

Note that as it stands,a theta space X is not a linear graph,for the arcs in question intersect in more than a common end point. One can write it as a graph, however, by breaking each of the arcs A,B,and C up into two arcs with an end point in common.

Lemma 64.1. Let X be a theta space that is a subspace of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ ; let A,B,and C be the arcs whose union is X.Then X separates $s ^ { 2 }$ into three components, whose boundaries are AUB,BUC,and AUC,respectively. The component having AUB as its boundary equals one of the components of $S ^ { 2 } - { \overset { } { A } } \cup B$

Proof. Let $\pmb { a }$ and b be the end points of the arcs A,B,and $c$ Consider the simple closed curve $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B } ;$ it separates ${ \bf { \widehat { \mathbf { \mathit { S } } } } } ^ { 2 }$ into two components U and $U ^ { \prime }$ ,each of which is open in $s ^ { 2 }$ and has boundary A U B. See Figure 64.3.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 64.3

The space $C - a - b$ is connected, so it is contained in one of these components, say in $U ^ { \prime }$ Then consider the two spaces ${ \bar { U } } = U \cup A \cup B$ and $c ;$ each is connected. Neither separates $\pmb { S } ^ { 2 }$ ,for C is an arc,and the complement of $\bar { U }$ is the connected set $U ^ { \prime }$ Since the intersection of these two sets consists of the two points $^ { a }$ and $b ,$ their union separates $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ into two components $V$ and $\pmb { W }$ ,by Theorem 63.5. It followsthat $s ^ { 2 } -$ $( A \cup B \cup C )$ is the union of the three disjoint connected sets $U , V$ and $\pmb { W }$ ：because they are open in $\textstyle { \pmb { S } } ^ { 2 }$ ,they are the components of $S ^ { 2 } - ( A \cup B \cup C )$ . The component $U$ has $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B }$ as its boundary. Symmetry implies that the other two have $B \cup c$ and