# Connectedness and Compactness

In the study of calculus, there are three basic theorems about continuous functions, and on these theorems the rest of calculus depends. They are the following:

Intermediate value theorem If $f : [ a , b ] \to \mathbb { R }$ is continuous and ifr is a real number between $f ( a )$ and $f ( b )$ ，then there exists an element $c \in [ a , b ]$ such that $\boldsymbol { f } ( \boldsymbol { c } ) = \boldsymbol { r }$

Maximum value theorem. If $f : [ a , b ] \to R$ is continuous,then there exists an element $c \in [ a , b ]$ such that $f ( x ) \leq f ( c )$ for every $x \in [ a , b ]$

Uniform continuity theorem. If $f : [ a , b ] \to \mathbb { R }$ is continuous,then given $\epsilon > 0$ there exists $\delta > 0$ such that $| f ( x _ { 1 } ) - f ( x _ { 2 } ) | < \epsilon$ for every pair of numbers $x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 }$ of $[ a , b ]$ for which $| x _ { 1 } - x _ { 2 } | < \delta$

These theorems are used in a number of places.The intermediate value theorem is used for instance in constructing inverse functions,such as $\sqrt [ 3 ] { x }$ and arcsin x;and the maximum value theorem is used for proving the mean value theorem for derivatives, upon which the two fundamental theorems of calculus depend. The uniform continuity theorem is used,among other things,for proving that every continuous function is integrable.

We have spoken of these three theorems as theorems about continuous functions. But they can also be considered as theorems about the closed interval $[ a , b ]$ of real numbers.The theorems depend not only on the continuity of f but also on properties of the topological space [a. b].

The property of the space [a,b]on which the intermediate value theorem depends is the property called connectedness,and the property on which the other two depend is the property called compactness.In this chapter, we shall define these properties for arbitrary topological spaces,and shall prove the appropriate generalized versions of these theorems.

As the three quoted theorems are fundamental for the theory of calculus,so are the notions of connectedness and compactness fundamental in higher analysis,geometry, and topology-indeed,in almost any subject for which the notion of topological space itself is relevant.

## \$23 Connected Spaces

The definition of connectedness for a topological space is a quite natural one. One says that a space can be “separated"if it can be broken up into two“globs"—disjoint open sets. Otherwise,one says that it is connected. From this simple idea much follows.

Definition. Let X be atopological space. A separation of X is a pair U,V of disjoint nonempty open subsets of X whose union is X.The space X is said to be connected if there does not exist a separation of X.

Connectedness is obviously a topological property,since it is formulated entirely in terms of the collection of open sets of X. Said differently,if X is connected,so is any space homeomorphic to X.

Another way of formulating the definition of connectedness is the following:

A space X is connected if and only if the only subsets of X that are both open and closed in X are the empty set and X itself.

For if A is a nonempty proper subset of X that is both open and closed in X,then the sets $U = { \pmb { A } }$ and $\pmb { V } = \pmb { X } - \pmb { A }$ constitute a separation of X,for they are open, disjoint, and nonempty,and their union is X. Conversely,if U and V form a separation of X, then U is nonempty and different from X,and it is both open and closed in X.

For a subspace Y of a topological space X,there is another useful way of formulating the definition of connectedness:

Lemma 23.1. IfY is a subspace of X,aseparation of Y is a pair of disjoint nonempty sets Aand B whose union is Y,neither of which contains a limit point of the other. The space Y is connected if there exists no separation of Y.

Proof.Suppose first that A and B form a separation of Y. Then A is both open and closed in Y.The closure of A in Y is the set $\bar { A } \cap \gamma$ (where $\pmb { \bar { A } }$ as usual denotes the closure of A in X). Since A is closed in Y, $A = \bar { A } \cap Y$ or to say the same thing, $\bar { A } \cap B = \emptyset$ .Since $\pmb { \bar { A } }$ is the union of A and its limut points,B contains no limit points of A. A simular argument shows that A contains no limit points of B.

Conversely,suppose that A and B are disjoint nonempty sets whose union is Y, neither of which contains a limit point of the other. Then $\bar { A } \cap B = \emptyset$ and $A \cap { \bar { B } } = \emptyset$ therefore,we conclude that ${ \bar { A } } \cap \gamma = A$ and ${ \bar { B } } \cap \gamma = B$ . Thus both A and B are closed in Y,and since $A = Y - B$ and $B = Y - A$ ,they are open in Y as well. □

EXAMPLE 1．Let X denote a two-point space in the indiscrete topology. Obviously there is no separaton of X,so X is connected.

EXAMPLE 2．Let Y denote the subspace[-1,O) U(O,l] of the real line R.Each of the sets [-1,O) and (O,1] is nonempty and open in Y (although not in R); therefore,they form a separation of Y.Alternatively, note that neither of these sets contains a limit point of the other.(They do have a limit point O in common,but that does not matter.)

EXAMPLE 3．Let X be the subspace[-1,1] of the real line. The sets[-1,O] and (0,1] are disjoint and nonempty,but they do not form a separation of X,because the first set is not open in X.Alternatively,noie that the first set contains a limit point,O.of the second. lndeed,there exists no separation of the space[-1,1]. We shallprove this fact shortly

EXAMPLE 4.The rationals Q are not connected.lndeed,the only connected subspaces of Qare the one-point sets: lf Y is a subspace of Q containing two points p and q. one can choose an irrational number a lying between p and q,and write Yas the union of the open sets

$$
Y \cap ( - \infty , a ) { \mathrm { a n d } } Y \cap ( a , + \infty ) .
$$

EXAMPLE 5.Consider the following subset of the plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

$$
X = \{ x \times y | y = 0 \} \cup \{ x \times y | x > 0 { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } y = 1 / x \} .
$$

Then X is not connected, indeed,the two indicated sets form a separation of X because neither contains a limit point of the other. See Figure 23.1.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 23.1

We have given several examples of spaces that are not connected. How can one construct spaces that are connected? We shall now prove several theorems that tell how to form new connected spaces from given ones. In the next section we shall apply these theorems to show that some specific spaces,such as intervals in R,and balls and cubes in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ,are connected.First, a lemma:

Lemma 23.2.If the sets C and D form a separation of X,and if Y is a connected subspace of X,then Y lies entirely within eitherC or D.

Proof.Since C and D are both open in X,the sets C N Y and D n Y are open in Y. These two sets are disjoint and their union is Y;if they were both nonempty，they would constitute a separation of Y. Therefore,one of them is empty. Hence Y must lie entirely in Cor in D

Theorem 23.3. The union of a collection of connected subspaces of X that have a point in common is connected.

Proof.Let $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ be a collection of connected subspaces of a space X;let p be a point of $\bigcap { A _ { \alpha } }$ .We prove that the space $\ Y = \bigcup A _ { \alpha }$ is connected. Suppose that $Y = C \cup D$ is a separation of Y.The point p is in one of the sets C or D;suppose $p \in C .$ Since $\pmb { A _ { \alpha } }$ is connected,it must lie entirely in either C or D,and it cannot lie in D because it contains the point p of C.Hence $A _ { \mathfrak { a } } \subset C$ for every α,so that $\bigcup A _ { \alpha } \subset C$ + contradicting the fact that D is nonempty.

Theorem 23.4. Let A be a connected subspace of X. $I f A \subset B \subset { \bar { A } } ,$ thenBis also connected.

Said differently: If B is formed by adjoining to the connected subspace A some or all of its limit points,then B is connected.

Proof. Let A be connected and let $A \subset B \subset { \bar { A } } .$ Suppose that $B = C \cup D$ is a separation of B. By Lemma 23.2,the set A must lie entirely in C or in D; suppose that $A \subset C$ Then ${ \bar { A } } \subset { \bar { C } } ;$ since $\tilde { c }$ and D are disjoint,B cannot intersect D.This contradicts the fact that D is a nonempty subset of B.

Theorem 23.5. The image of a connected space under a continuous map is connected.

Proof. Let $f : X \to Y$ be a continuous map; let X be connected. We wish to prove the image space $Z = f ( X )$ is connected. Since the map obtained from f by restricting its range to the space Z is also continuous,it suffices to consider the case of a continuous surjective map

$$
g : X \to Z .
$$

Suppose that $Z = A \cup B$ is a separation of Z into two disjoint nonempty sets open in Z. Then $g ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ and $g ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ are disjoint sets whose union is X; they are open in X because g is continuous,and nonempty because g is surjective. Therefore,they form a separation of X,contradicting the assumption that X is connected. □

Theorem 23.6. A finite cartesian product of connected spaces is connected.

Proof.We prove the theorem first for the product of two connected spaces X and Y. This proof is easy to visualize. Choose a“base point" $\textbf { \em a } \times \textbf { \em b }$ in the product $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \cal Y }$ Note that the “horizontal slice" $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { b }$ is connected,being homeomorphic with X,and each“vertical slice" $x \times r$ is connected,being homeomorphic with Y．As a result, each “T-shaped"space

$$
T _ { x } = ( X \times b ) \cup ( x \times Y )
$$

is connected,being the union of two connected spaces that have the point $x \times b$ in common. See Figure 23.2. Now form the union $\cup _ { \mathfrak { r } \in X } T _ { x }$ of all these T-shaped spaces.

This union is connected because it is the union of a collection of connected spaces that have the point $\textbf { \em a } \times \textbf { \em b }$ in common. Since this union equals $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ ,the space $X \times Y$ is connected.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 23.2

The proof for any finite product of connected spaces follows by induction, using the fact (easily proved) that $X _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times X _ { n }$ is homeomorphic with $( X _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times X _ { n - 1 } ) \times$ $\pmb { \chi } _ { n }$

It is natural to ask whether this theorem extends to arbitrary products of connected spaces.The answer depends on which topology is used for the product,as the following examples show.

EXAMPLE 6．Consider the cartesian product $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the box topology.We can write $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ as the union of the set A consisting of allbounded sequences of real numbers,and the set B of lluboundedsequences.hesesetsaredisjointandeach isopeninthebotology For if a is a point of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,the open set

$$
U = ( a _ { 1 } - 1 , a _ { 1 } + 1 ) \times ( a _ { 2 } - 1 , a _ { 2 } + 1 ) \times .
$$

consists entirely of bounded sequences if a is bounded,and of unbounded seque nces if a if unbounded. Thus,even though R is connected (as we shall prove in the next secton). $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is not connected in the box topology.

EXAMPLE 7.Now consider $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the product topology.Assuming that R is connected, we show that $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is connected. Let ${ \bar { \mathbb { R } } } ^ { n }$ denote the subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ consisting of all sequences $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , . . . )$ such that $x _ { i } \ = 0$ for $i > n$ The space $\bar { \mathbb { R } } ^ { n }$ is clearly homeomorphic to $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ,so that it is connected,by the preceding theorem. lt follows that the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ that is the union of the spaces $\hat { \mathbb { R } } ^ { n }$ is connected,for these spaces have the point $\bullet = ( 0 , 0 , \ldots )$ in common.We show that the closure of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ equals all of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,fromwhich it follows that $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is connected as well.

Let $\mathbf { a } = ( a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ be a point of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ Let $U = \prod U _ { i }$ be a basis element for the product topology that contains a.We show that $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ intersects $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ .There is an integer N such that $U _ { \iota } = \mathbb { R } \mathrm { f o r } i > N$ .Then the point

$$
\mathbf { x } = ( a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { n } , 0 , 0 , \ldots )
$$

of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ belongs to U, since $a _ { i } \in U _ { i }$ for all i, and $0 \in U _ { i }$ for $i > N$

The argument just given generalizes to show that an arbitrary product of connected spaces is connected in the product topology. Since we shall not need this result,we leave the proof to the exercises.

## Exercises

1. Let J and $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime }$ be two topologies on X． If $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime } \supset \mathcal { T }$ ，what does connectedness of X in one topology imply about connectedness in the other?

2. Let $\{ A _ { n } \}$ be a sequence of connected subspaces of X,such that $A _ { n } \cap A _ { n + 1 } \neq \emptyset$ for all n.Show that $\bigcup A _ { n }$ is connected.

3. Let $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ be a collection of connected subspaces of X;let A be a connected subspace of X.Show that if $A \cap A _ { \alpha } \neq \emptyset$ for all α, then $\pmb { A } \cup ( \bigcup \pmb { A _ { \alpha } } )$ is connected.

4.Showthatif Xisaninfiiteset,itisconectedinthefnitecomplementpology.

5.A space is totally disconnected if its only connected subspaces are one-point sets.Show that if X has the discrete topology,then X is totally disconnected. Does the converse hold?

6. Let $A \subset X$ Show that if C is a connected subspace of X that intersects both A and $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { A }$ ,then C intersects Bd A.

7. Is the space $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ connected? Justify your answer.

8. Determine whether or not $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is connected in the uniform topology.

9.Let A be a proper subset of X,and let B be a proper subset of Y. If X and Y are connected,show that

$$
( X \times Y ) - ( A \times B )
$$

is connected.

10. Let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ be an indexed family of connected spaces; let X be the product space

$$
X = \prod _ { \alpha \in J } X _ { \alpha } .
$$

Let $\mathsf { \pmb { a } } = ( \pmb { a } _ { \alpha } )$ be a fixed point of X.

(a)Given any finite subset K of J,let $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { K } }$ denote the subspace of X consisting of all points $\textbf { x } = \mathbf { \mu } ( x _ { \alpha } )$ such that $\textstyle x _ { \alpha } = a _ { \alpha }$ for α $\$ K$ . Show that $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { K } }$ is connected.

(b） Show that the union Yof the spaces $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \kappa } }$ is connected.

(c） Show that X equals the closure of $\boldsymbol { \mathsf { Y } } ;$ conclude that X is connected

11. Let $p : X \to Y$ be a quotient map. Show that if each set $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} )$ is connected, and if Y is connected,then X is connected.

12. Let $Y \subset X ;$ ：let Xand Ybe connected.Show that if Aand B form a separation of $X - Y$ then $\pmb { Y } \cup \pmb { A }$ and $\pmb { Y } \cup \pmb { B }$ are connected.

## \$24Connected Subspaces of the Real Line

The theorems of the preceding section show us how to construct new connected spaces out of given ones. But where can we find some connected spaces to start with? The best place to begin is the real line.We shall prove that R is connected,and so are the intervals and rays in R.

One application is the intermediate value theorem of calculus, suitably generalized.Another is the result that such familiar spaces as balls and spheres in euclidean space are connected; the proof involves a new nouon, called path connectedness, which we also discuss.

The fact that intervals and rays in R are connected may be familiar to you from analysis. We prove it again here,in generalized form. It turns out that this fact does not depend on the algebraic properties of R, but only on its order properties.To make this clear,we shall prove the theorem for an arbitrary ordered set that has the order properties of R. Such a set is called a linear continuum.

Definition.A simply ordered set L having more than one element is called a linear continuum if the following hold:

(1）L has the least upper bound property.

(2) If x <y,there exists z such that $x < z < y$

Theorem 24.1. If L is a linear continuum in the order topology, then L is connected, and so are intervals and rays in L.

Proof.Recall that a subspace Y of L is said to be convex if for every pair of points a,b of Y with $a < b$ ,the entire interval [a,b] of points of L lies in Y.We prove that if Y is a convex subspace of L,then Y is connected.

So suppose that Y is the union of the disjoint nonempty sets A and B,each of which is open inY Choose $a \in A$ and $\boldsymbol { b } \in \pmb { B }$ ；suppose for convenience that $a \ < b .$ The interval $[ a , b ]$ of points of L is contained in Y.Hence [a,b] is the uriion of the disjoint sets

$$
A _ { 0 } = A \cap [ a , b ] \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad B _ { 0 } = B \cap [ a , b ] ,
$$

each of which is open in $[ a , b ]$ in the subspace topology, which is the same as the order topology. The sets $\pmb { A } _ { 0 }$ and $\pmb { B } _ { 0 }$ are nonempty because $a \in A _ { 0 }$ and $\boldsymbol { b } \in B _ { 0 }$ Thus, $\pmb { A } _ { 0 }$ and ${ \pmb B } _ { 0 }$ constitute a separation of $[ a , b ]$

Let $c = \operatorname* { s u p } A _ { 0 }$ .We show that c belongs neither to $\pmb { A } _ { 0 }$ nor to ${ \pmb B } _ { 0 }$ , which contradicts the fact that [a,b] is the union of $A _ { 0 }$ and ${ \pmb B } _ { 0 }$

Case l.Suppose that $c \in B _ { 0 }$ Then $c \neq a .$ ，so either $c = b$ or $a < c < b$ In either case,it follows from the fact that ${ \pmb { B } } _ { 0 }$ is open in $[ a , b ]$ that there is some interval of the form $( d , c ]$ contained in $B _ { 0 }$ .If $c = b$ ,we have a contradiction at once,for d is a smaller upper bound on $\pmb { A } _ { 0 }$ than c. If $c < b$ ,we note that $( c , b ]$ does not intersect $\pmb { A } _ { 0 }$ (because c is an upper bound on $A _ { 0 } )$ . Then

$$
( d , b ] = ( d , c ] \cup ( c , b ]
$$

does not intersect $A _ { 0 }$ ，Again,d is a smaller upper bound on $A _ { 0 }$ than c, contrary to construction. See Figure 24.1.

<!-- image-->

Case 2. Suppose that $c \in A _ { 0 }$ Then $c \neq b$ ，so either $c = a$ or $a \ < \ c \ < \ b .$ Because $A _ { 0 }$ is open in $[ a , b ]$ ,there must be some interval of the form $[ c , e )$ contained in $A _ { 0 }$ ，See Figure 24.2. Because of order property (2) of the linear continuum $L$ we can choose a point z of L such that $c < z < e .$ Then $z \in A _ { 0 }$ contrary to the fact that c is an upper bound for $A _ { 0 }$

Corollary 24.2. The real line R is connected and so are intervals and rays in R.

As an application,we prove the intermediate value theorem of calculus,suitably generalized.

Theorem 24.3 (Intermediate value theorem). Let $f : X \to Y$ be a continuous map,where X is a connected space and Y is an ordered set in the order topology.If a and b are two points of X and $i f r$ is a point of Y lying between $f ( a )$ and $f ( b )$ ,then there exists a pointc of X such that $\boldsymbol { f } ( \boldsymbol { c } ) = \boldsymbol { r }$

The intermediate value theorem of calculus is the special case of this theorem that occurs when we take X to be a closed interval in R and Y to be R.

Proof.Assume the hypotheses of the theorem. The sets

$$
A = f ( X ) \cap ( - \infty , r ) \quad { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } \quad B = f ( X ) \cap ( r , + \infty )
$$

are disjoint, and they are nonempty because one contains $f ( a )$ and the other contains $f ( b )$ . Each is open in $f ( \pmb { \cal { X } } )$ ,being the intersection of an open ray in Y with $f ( X )$ If there were no point c of X such that $\boldsymbol { f } ( \boldsymbol { c } ) = \boldsymbol { r }$ then $f ( { \pmb X } )$ would be the union of the sets A and B.Then A and B would constitute a separation of $f ( \pmb { \chi } )$ ,contradicting the fact that the image of a connected space under a continuous map is connected. □

EXAMPE 1.One example of a linear continum different from R is the ordered square. Wecheck the least upper bound property. (The second property of alinear continuum is trivial to check.) Let A be a subset of $I \times I$ ,let $\pi _ { 1 } \quad I \times I \to I$ be projection on the first coordinate; let $\pmb { b } = \mathbf { s u p } \pi _ { 1 } ( \pmb { A } )$ .lf $b \in \pi _ { 1 } ( A )$ ,then A intersects the subset $\textit { \textbf { b } } \times \textit { \textbf { I } }$ of $I \times I$ Because $\boldsymbol { b } \times \boldsymbol { I }$ has the order type of /,the set $\pmb { A } \cap ( \pmb { b } \times \pmb { I } )$ will have a least upper bound $\pmb { b } \times \pmb { c } ,$ ,which will be the least upper bound of A. See Figure 24.3. If b $\not \in \pi _ { 1 } ( A )$ 、then $\pmb { b } \times \pmb { 0 }$ is the least upper bound of A; no element of the form $\smash { b ^ { \prime } \times c }$ with $\smash { b ^ { \prime } < b }$ can be an upper bound for A,for then $\pmb { b } ^ { \prime }$ would be an upper bound for $\pi _ { l } ( A )$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 24.3

EXAMPLE 2．If X is a well-ordered set, then $\pmb { \cal X } \times [ 0 , 1 )$ is a linear continuum in the dictionary order; this we leave to you to check.This set can be thought of as having been constructed by “fiting in"a set of the order type of (O,1） immediately following each element of X.

Connectedness of intervals in R gives rise to an especially useful criterion for showing that a space X is connected; namely,the condition that every pair of points of X can be joined by a path in X:

Definition. Given points x and y of the space X,a path in X from x to y is a continuous map $f : [ a , b ] \to X$ of some closed interval in the real line into X,such that $f ( a ) = x$ and $\boldsymbol f ( \boldsymbol b ) = \boldsymbol y$ .Aspace X is said to be path connected if every pair of points of X can be joined by a path in X.

It is easy to see that a path-connected space X is connected. Suppose $X = A \cup B$ is a separation of X.Let $f : [ a , b ] \to X$ be any path in X.Being the continuous image of a connected set, the set $f ( [ a , b ] )$ is connected,so that it lies entirely in either A or B.Therefore,there is no path in X joining a point of A to a point of B,contrary to the assumption that X is path connected.

The converse does not hold; a connected space need not be path connected. See Examples 6and 7 following.

EXAMPLE 3.Define the uni ball $B ^ { n }$ .m $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ by the equation

$$
B ^ { n } = \{ { \bf x } \mid \| { \bf x } \| \leq 1 \} ,
$$

where

$$
\| \mathbf { x } \| = \| ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } ) \| = ( x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } + \mathbf { \varepsilon } \cdot + x _ { n } ^ { 2 } ) ^ { 1 / 2 }
$$

The unit ball is path connected; given any two points x and y of $B ^ { n }$ ,the straight-line path $f : [ 0 , 1 ] \to \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ defined by

$$
f ( t ) = ( 1 - t ) \mathbf { x } + t \mathbf { y }
$$

lies in $B ^ { n }$ For if x and y are in $B ^ { n }$ and t is in [0. 1],

$$
\| f ( t ) \| \leq ( 1 - t ) \| \mathbf { x } \| + t \| \mathbf { y } \| \leq 1 .
$$

A similar argument shows that every open ball $B _ { d } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ and every closed ball $\bar { B } _ { d } ( { \bf x } , \epsilon )$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ is path connected.

EXAMPLE 4.Define punctured euclidean space to be the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { n } - \{ \pmb { \mathbb { 0 } } \}$ ,where O is the origin in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ .If $n > 1$ ,this space is path connected. Given x and y different from 0. we can join x and yby the straight-line path between them if that path does not go through the origin. Otherwise,we can choose a point z not on the line joining x and y,and take the broken-line path from x to z,and then from z to y

EXAMPLE 5. Define the unit sphere $\ S ^ { n - 1 }$ . $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ by the equation

$$
S ^ { n - 1 } = \{ { \bf x } \ | \ \| { \bf x } \| = 1 \} .
$$

lf $n > 1$ ,it is path connected.For the map $g : \mathbb { R } ^ { n } - \{ \pmb { 0 } \}  S ^ { n - 1 }$ defined by $g ( \mathbf { x } ) = \mathbf { x } / \| \mathbf { x } \|$ is continuous and surjective;and it is easy to show that the continuous image of a pathconnected space is path connected.

EXAMPLE 6. The ordered square $I _ { o } ^ { 2 }$ is connected but not path connected.

Being a linear continuum,the ordered square is connected.Let $p = 0 \times 0$ and $q =$ $1 \times 1$ .We suppose there is a path $f : [ a , b ] \to { \dot { I } } _ { o } ^ { 2 }$ joiningpandq and derive acontradiction. The image set $f ( \left[ a , b \right] )$ must contain every point $\pmb { x } \ \times \ \pmb { y }$ of $I _ { o } ^ { 2 } .$ bythe intermediate value theorem.Therefore,for each $x \in { I }$ the set

$$
U _ { x } = f ^ { - 1 } ( x \times ( 0 , 1 ) )
$$

is a nonempty subsetof [a,b]; by continuity, it is open in [a,b]. See Figure 24.4. Choose, for each $x \in { I }$ .arational number $\pmb { q } _ { x }$ belonging to $U _ { \tau }$ . Since the sets $U _ { x }$ are disjoint, the map $x \to q _ { x }$ is an injective mapping of / into Q.This contradicts the fact that the interval / is uncountable (which we shall prove later)

EXAMPLE 7.Let S denote the following subset of the plane.

$$
S = \{ x \times \sin ( 1 / x ) \mid 0 < x \leq 1 \} .
$$

Because S is the image of the connected set (O,l] under_a continuous map,S is connected. Therefore,its closure S in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ isalsoconnected.ThesetSisalassicalexampleintoology called the topologist's sine curve.It is illustrated in Figure 24.5; it equals the union of S and the vertical interval $0 \times \left[ - 1 , 1 \right]$ .We show that $\bar { \pmb { s } }$ is not path connected.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 24.4

Suppose there is a path $f \cdot [ a , c ]  \bar { s }$ beginning at the ongin and ending at a point of S.The set of those t for which $f ( t ) \in 0 \times [ - 1 , 1 ]$ is closed,so it has a largest element b. Then $f : [ b , c ] \to { \bar { s } }$ isa path that maps b into the vertical interval $0 \times \left\{ - 1 , 1 \right\}$ and maps the other points of [b,c] to points of S.

Replace [b,c] by [O.1] for convenience; let $f ( t ) = ( x ( t ) , y ( t ) )$ . Then $\begin{array} { r } { x ( 0 ) = 0 , } \end{array}$ while $x ( t ) > 0$ and $y ( t ) = \sin ( 1 / x ( t ) )$ for $t > 0$ 、We show there is a sequence of points $t _ { n }  0$ such that $y ( t _ { n } ) = ( - 1 ) ^ { n }$ . Then the sequence $y ( t _ { n } )$ does not converge,contradicting continuity of f.

To find $t _ { n }$ ,we proceed as follows: Given n,choose u with $0 < u < x ( 1 / n )$ such that $\sin ( 1 / u ) = ( - 1 ) ^ { n }$ .Then use the intermediate value theorem to find $t _ { n }$ with $0 < t _ { n } < 1 / n$ such that $\pmb { x } ( t _ { n } ) = \pmb { u }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 24.5

## Exercises

1.(a) Show that no two of the spaces (O,1),(0,1],and [0,1] are homeomorphic. [Hint:What happens if you remove a point from each of these spaces?)]

(b）Suppose that there exist imbeddings $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to X$ Show by means of an example that X and Y need not be homeomorphic.

(c） Show $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ and R are not homeomorphic if $n > 1$

2. Let $f : S ^ { 1 } \to \mathbb { R }$ be a continuous map. Show there exists a point x of $s ^ { 1 }$ such that $f ( x ) = f ( - x )$

3. Let $f : X \to X$ be continuous. Show that if $X = [ 0 , 1 ]$ ,there is a point x such that $f ( x ) = x$ .The point x is called a fixed point of f.What happens if X equals [0. 1) or $( 0 , 1 ) ^ { \gamma }$

4.Let X be an ordered set in the order topology. Show that if X is connected, then X is a linear continuum.

5.Consider the following sets in the dictionary order.Which are linear continua? (a) $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times [ 0 , 1 )$ (b) $[ 0 , 1 ) \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ （c） $[ 0 , 1 ) \times [ 0 , 1 ]$ (d) $[ 0 , 1 ] \times [ 0 , 1 )$

6.Show that if X is a well-ordered set,then $\pmb { X } \times [ 0 , 1 )$ in the dictionary order is a linear continuum.

7.(a)Let X and Y be ordered sets in the order topology. Show that if $f : X \to Y$ is order preserving and surjective,then f is a homeomorphism.

(b) Let $\pmb { X } = \pmb { Y } = \bar { \mathbb { R } } _ { + }$ .Given a positive integer n,show that the function $f ( x ) =$ $x ^ { n }$ is order preserving and surjective. Conclude that its inverse,the nth root function,is continuous.

(c)Let X be the subspace $( - \infty , - 1 ) \cup [ 0 , \infty )$ of R.Show that the function $f : X \to \mathbb { R }$ defined by setting $f ( x ) = x + \operatorname { I }$ if $x < - 1$ ,and $f ( x ) = x$ if $\pmb { x } \ge 0$ ,is order preserving and surjective.Is f a homeomorphism?Compare with (a).

8. (a) Is a product of path-connected spaces necessarily path connected?

(b）If $A \subset X$ and A is path connected,is A necessanly path connected?

(c）If $f : X \to Y$ is continuous and X is path connected,is $f ( X )$ necessanly path connected?

(d) If $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is a collection of path-connected subspaces of X and if $\bigcap A _ { \alpha } \neq \alpha$ is $\bigcup A _ { \alpha }$ necessarily path connected?

9.Assume that R is uncountable. Show that if A is a countable subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,then $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - A$ is path connected. [Hint: How many lines are there passing through a given point of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 \cdot \gamma } ]$

10.Show that if U is an open connected subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } .$ ,then U is path connected. [Hint: Show that given $\qquad x _ { 0 } \in U$ ,the set of points that can be joined to $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ by a path in U is both open and closed in U.]

11. If A is a connected subspace of X,does it follow that Int A and Bd A are connected? Does the converse hold? Justify your ans wers.

\*12. Recall that $s _ { \Omega }$ denotes the minimal uncountable well-ordered set. Let L denote the ordered set $S _ { \Omega } \times [ 0 , 1 )$ in the dictionary order,with its smallest element deleted.The set L is a classical example in topology called the long line.

Theorem. The long line is path connected and locally homeomorphic to R,but it cannot be imbedded in R.

(a)Let X be an ordered set; let $a < b < c$ be points of X. Show that $[ a , c )$ has the order type of [O,l) if and only if both [a,b) and [b.c） have the order type of [0, 1)

(b)Let X be an ordered set. Let $x _ { 0 } < x _ { 1 } < \cdots$ be an increasing sequence of points of X;suppose $b = \operatorname { s u p } \{ x _ { t } \}$ Show that $[ x _ { 0 } , b )$ has the order type of [0.l)if and only if each interval $[ x _ { t } , x _ { i + 1 } )$ has the order type of (O.1).

(c）Let ao denote the smallest element of $s _ { \Omega }$ .For each element a of $S _ { \Omega }$ different from ao,show that the interval $[ a _ { 0 } \times 0 , a \times 0 )$ of $S _ { \Omega } \times [ 0 , 1 )$ has the order type of [O,l). [Hint:Proceed by transfinite induction. Either a has an immediate predecessor in $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ ,or there is an increasing sequence ${ \pmb { a } } _ { t }$ in $s _ { \Omega }$ with $\pmb { a } = \mathbf { s u p } \{ \pmb { a } _ { i } \} .$ 一

(d） Show that L is path connected.

(e）Show that every point of L has a neighborhood homeomorphic with an open interval in R.

(f） Show that L cannot be imbedded in R,or indeed in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ for any n. [Hint: Any subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ has a countable basis for its topology.l

## \*\$25Components and Local Connectedness+

Given an arbitrary space X,there is a natural way to break it up into pieces that are connected (or path connected).We consider that process now.

Definition.Given X,define an equivalence relation on X by setting $x \sim y$ if there is a connected subspace of X containing both x and y. The equivalence classes are called the components (or the "connected components") of X.

Symmetry and reflexivity of the relation are obvious.Transitivity follows by noting that if A is a connected subspace containing x and y,and if B is a connected subspace containing y and z,then $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B }$ isa subspace containing x and z that is connected because A and B have the point y in common.

The components of X can also be described as follows:

Theorem 25.1. The components of X are connected disjoint subspaces of X whose union is X,such that each nonempty connected subspace of X intersects only one of them.

Proof.Being equivalence classes,the components of X are disjoint and their union is X.Each connected subspace A of X intersects only one of them.For if A intersects the components $C _ { 1 }$ and $C _ { 2 }$ of X,say in points $x _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { x } \pmb { 2 }$ ,respectively, then $\textstyle \pmb { x } _ { 1 } \sim \pmb { x } _ { 2 }$ by definition; this cannot happen unless $C _ { 1 } = C _ { 2 }$

To show the component C is connected, choose a point xo of $^ { c . }$ For each point x of $c ,$ we know that $x _ { 0 } \sim x$ ,so there is a connected subspace $A _ { x }$ containing $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ and x. By the result just proved, $A _ { x } \subset C$ .Therefore,

$$
C = \bigcup _ { x \in C } A _ { \mathrm { { r } } } .
$$

Since the subspaces $A _ { x }$ are connected and have the point xo in common,their union is connected. □

Definition.We define another equivalence relation on the space X by detining $x \sim y$ if there is a path in X from x to y. The equivalence classes are called the path components of X.

Let us show this is an equivalence relation.First we note that if there exists a path $f : [ a , b ] \to X$ from x to y whose domain is the interval $[ a , b ]$ ,then there is also apath g from x toy having the closed interval $[ c , d ]$ as its domain.(This follows from the fact that any two closed intervals in R are homeomorphic.） Now the fact that $x \sim x$ for each x in X follows from the existence of the constant path $f : [ a , b ] \to X$ defined by the equation $\boldsymbol { f } ( t ) = \boldsymbol { x }$ for all t.Symmetry follows from the fact that if $f : [ 0 , 1 ] \to X$ is a path from x to y,then the"reverse path" $g : [ 0 , 1 ] \to X$ defined by $g ( t ) = f ( 1 - t )$ is a path from y to x.Finally,transitivity is proved as follows: Let $f : [ 0 , 1 ] \to X$ be a path from x toy,and let $g \ . \ [ 1 , 2 ]  X$ be a path from y to z. We can "paste f and g together" to get a path $h : [ 0 , 2 ] \to X$ from x to z; the path h will be continuous by the “pasting lemma."Theorem 18.3.

One has the following theorem,whose proof is similar to that of the theorem preceding:

Theorem 25.2. The path components of X are path-connected disjoint subspaces of X whose union is X,such that each nonempty path-connected subspace of X intersects only one of them.

Note that each component of a space X is closed in X,since the closure of a connected subspace of X is connected. If X has only finitely many components,then each component is also open in X,since its complement is a finite union of closed sets But in general the components of X need not be open in X.

One can say even less about the path components of X,for they need be neither open nor closed in X. Consider the following examples:

EXAMPLE 1．If Q is the subspace of R consisting of the rational numbers,then each component of Q consists of a single point. None of the components of Q are open in Q.

EXAMPLE 2.The“topologist's sine $\mathsf { c u r v e } ^ { \ast } \bar { s }$ of the preceding section is a space that has a single component (since it is connected) and two path components One path component is the curve Sand the other is the vertical interval $V = 0 \times [ - 1 , 1 ]$ Note that S is open n $\bar { \pmb S }$ but not closed,while V is closed but not open

If one forms a space from S by deleting all points of V having rational second coordinate,one obtains a space that has only one component but uncountably many path components.

Connectedness is a useful property for a space to possess. But for some purposes, it ismore important thatthe space satisfyaconnectedness condition locally.Roughly speaking,local connectedness means that each point has “arbitrarily small" neighborhoods that are connected.More precisely,one has the following definition:

Definition.A space X is said to be locally connected at x if for every neighborhood U of x,there is a connected neighborhood V of x contained in U If X is locally connected at each of its points,it is said simply to be locally connected. Similarly, a space X is said to be locally path connected at x if for every neighborhood U of x, there is a path-connected neighborhood V of x contained in U.If X is locally path connected at each of its points,then it is said to be locally path connected.

EXAMPLE 3．Each interval and each ray in the real line is both connected and locally connected The subspace $\left[ - 1 , 0 \right) \cup ( 0 ,$ 1] of R is not connected,but it is locally connected The topologist's sine curve is connected but not locally connected． The rationals Q are neiher connected nor locally connected.

Theorem 25.3.A space X is locally connected if and only if for every open set U of X,each component of U is open in X.

Proof.Suppose that X is locally connected; let U be an open set in X;let C be a component of U If x is a point of C,we can choose a connected neighborhood V of x such that $v \subset U$ . Since V is connected,it must lie entirely in the component C of U. Therefore,C is open in X.

Conversely,suppose that components of open sets in X are open. Given a point x of X and a neighborhood U of x,let C be the component of U containing x. Now C is connected; since it is open in X by hypothesis,X is locally connected at x. ■

A similar proof holds for the following theorem:

Theorem 25.4.A space X is locally path connected if and only if for every open set U of X,each path component of U is open in X.

The relation between path components and components is given in the following theorem:

Theorem 25.5. If X is a topological space,each path component of X lies in a component of X If X is locally path connected,then the components and the path components of X are the same.

Proof.Let C be a component of X; let x be a point of C;let P be the path component of X containing x. Since P is connected, $P \subset C$ .We wish to show that if X is locally path connected,P= C. Suppose that $P \subsetneq C$ Let Q denote the union of all the path components of X that are different from Pand intersect C,each of them necessarily lies in $c .$ so that

$$
C = P \cup Q .
$$

Because X is locally path connected,each path component of X is open in X.Therefore,P (which is a path component) and $Q$ (which is a union of path components) are open in X,so they constitute a separation of C.This contradicts the fact that C is connected.

## Exercises

1.What are the components and path components of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ?$ What are the continuous maps $f : \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ?$

2. (a) What are the components and path components of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ (in the product topol-$\mathbf { o g y } ) ?$

(b） Consider $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the uniform topology. Show that X and y lie in the same component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ if and only if the sequence

$$
\mathbf { x } - \mathbf { y } = ( x _ { 1 } - y _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } - y _ { 2 } , \ldots )
$$

is bounded.[Hint: It sufices to consider the case where $\mathbf { y } = \mathbf { 0 . } ]$

(c） Give $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ the box topology. Show that x and y lie in the same component of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ if and only if the sequence $\tt x - y$ is “eventually zero."[Hint: If $\tt x - y$ is not eventually zero,show there is homeomorphism h of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ with itself such that $\pmb { h } ( \mathbf { x } )$ is bounded and $\pmb { h } ( \mathbf { y } )$ is unbounded.]

3.Show that the ordered square is locally connected but not locally path connected. What are the path components of this space?

4.Let X be locally path connected. Show that every connected open set in X is path connected.

5.Let X denote the rational points of the interval $[ 0 , 1 ] \times 0$ of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ .Let T denote the union of all line segments joining the point $p = 0 \times 1$ to points of X.

(a) Show thatTis pathconnected,butis locallyconnected onlyat the point p.

(b） Find a subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ that is path connected but is locally connected at none of its points.

6.A space X is said to be weakly locally connected at x if for every neighborhood $\boldsymbol { \imath }$ of x,there is a connected subspace of X contained in U that contains a neighborhood of x. Show that if X is weakly locally connected at each of its points,then X is locally connected. [Hint: Show that components of open sets are open.]

7.Consider the “infinite broom”X pictured in Figure 25.1. Show that X is not locally connected at p,but is weakly locally connected at p. [Hint: Any connected neighborhood of p must contain allthe points ai.]

<!-- image-->

8.Let $p : X \to Y$ be a quotient map. Show that if X is locally connected, then Y is locally connected.[Hint: If C is a component of the open set U of Y,show that $p ^ { - 1 } ( C )$ is a union of components of $p ^ { - 1 } ( U ) . ]$

9.Let G be a topological group; let C be the component of G containing the identity element e. Show that C is a normal subgroup of G.[Hint: If $x \in G$ ,then $_ { x C }$ is the component of G containing x.]

10.Let X bea space.Let us define $x \sim y$ if there is no separation $\pmb { \cal { X } } = \pmb { \cal { A } } \cup \pmb { \cal { B } }$ of X into disjoint open sets such that $x \in A$ and $y \in B$

(a） Show this relation is an equivalence relation. The equivalence classes are called the quasicomponents of X.

(b） Show that each component of X lies in a quasicomponent of X,and that the components and quasicomponents of X are the same if X is locally connected.

(c） Let K denote the set $\{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ and let- K denote the set $\{ - 1 / \pmb { n } \mid \pmb { n } \in$ $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } ]$ .Determine the components,path components,and quasicomponents of the following subspaces of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ：

$$
A = ( K \times [ 0 , 1 ] ) \cup \{ 0 \times 0 \} \cup \{ 0 \times 1 \} .
$$

$$
B = A \cup ( [ 0 , 1 ] \times \{ 0 ] ) .
$$

$$
C = ( K \times [ 0 , 1 ] ) \cup ( - K \times [ - 1 , 0 ] ) \cup ( [ 0 , 1 ] \times - K ) \cup ( [ - 1 , 0 ] \times K ) .
$$

## \$26 Compact Spaces

The notion of compactness is not nearly so natural as that of connectedness.From the beginnings of topology, it was clear that the closed interval [a,b] of the real line had a certain property that was crucial for proving such theorems as the maximum value theorem and the uniform continuity theorem.But for a long time,it was not clear how this property should be formulated for an arbitrary topological space It used to be thought that the crucial property of [a,b] was the fact that every infinite subset of [a,b] has a limit point,and this property was the one dignified with the name of compactness.Later,mathematicians realized that this formulation does not lie at the heart of the mater, but rather that a stronger formulation,in terms of open coverings of the space,is more central. The latter formulation is what we now call compactness.

It is not as natural or intuitive as the former; some familiarity with it is needed before its usefulness becomes apparent.

Definition.A collection A of subsets of a space X is said to cover X,or to be a covering of X,if the union of the elements of A is equal to X. It is called an open covering of X if its elements are open subsets of X.

Definition.A space X is said to be compact if every open covering A of X contains a finite subcollection that also covers X.

EXAMPLE l．The real line R is not compact,for the covering of R by open intervals

$$
\pmb { \mathscr { s } } = \{ ( \pmb { n } , \pmb { n } + 2 ) ~ | ~ \pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } \}
$$

contains no finite subcollectuon that covers R.

EXAMPLE 2The following subspace of R is compact:

$$
X = \{ 0 \} \cup \{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} .
$$

Given an open covering A of X,there is an element U of A containing O.The set U contains all but finitely many of the points 1/n; choose,for each point of X not in U,an element of A containing it. The collection consisting of these elements of A,along with the element U,is a finite subcollection of A that covers X.

EXAMPLE 3.Any space X containing only finitely many points is necessanly compact, because in this case every open covering of X is finite.

EXAMPLE 4.The interval (O,1] is not compact; the open covering

$$
\pmb { \mathscr { s } } = \{ ( 1 / n , 1 ] \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}
$$

contains no finite subcollection covering (O.1}. Nor is the interval (O.1） compact; the same argument applies.On the other hand,the interval [O,l] is compact; you are probably already famuliar with this fact from analysis.In any case,we shallprove it shortly.

In general, it takes some effort to decide whether a given space is compact or not.First we shall prove some general theorems that show us how to construct new compact spaces out of existing ones. Then in the next section we shall show certain specitic spaces are compact. These spaces include all closed intervals in the real line, and all closed and bounded subsets of R".

Let us first prove some facts about subspaces. If Y is a subspace of X,a collection A of subsets of X is said to cover Y if the union of its elements contains Y.

Lemma 26.1. Let Y be a subspace of X. Then Y is compact if and only if every covering of Y by sets open in X contains a finite subcollection covering Y.

Proof.Suppose that Y is compact and $\mathcal { A } = \{ A _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ is a covering of Y by sets open in X.Then the collection

$$
\{ A _ { \alpha } \cap Y \mid \alpha \in J \}
$$

is a covering of Y by sets open in Y; hence a finite subcollection

$$
\{ A _ { \alpha _ { 1 } } \cap Y , \dotsc , A _ { \alpha _ { n } } \cap Y \}
$$

covers Y. Then $\{ A _ { \alpha _ { 1 } } , \dotsc , A _ { \alpha _ { n } } \}$ is a subcollection of A that covers Y.

Conversely,suppose the given condition holds; we wish to prove Y compact. Let $\mathcal { A } ^ { \prime } = \{ A _ { \alpha } ^ { \prime } \}$ be a covering of Y by sets open in Y. For each α, choose a set $\pmb { A _ { \alpha } }$ open in X such that

$$
A _ { \alpha } ^ { \prime } = A _ { \alpha } \cap Y .
$$

The collection $\mathcal { A } = \{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is a covering of Y by sets open in X By hypothesis,some finite subcollection $\{ A _ { \alpha _ { 1 } } , \dotsc , A _ { \alpha _ { n } } \}$ covers Y.Then $\{ A _ { \alpha _ { 1 } } ^ { \prime } , \ldots , A _ { \alpha _ { n } } ^ { \prime } \}$ is a subcollection of $\mathcal { A } ^ { \prime }$ that covers Y ■

## Theorem 26.2. Every closed subspace of a compact space is compact.

Proof.Let Y be a closed subspace of the compact space X. Given a covering A of Y by sets open in X,let us form an open covering B of X by adjoining to A the single open set $X - Y$ ,that is,

$$
{ \mathcal { B } } = { \mathcal { A } } \cup \{ X - Y \} .
$$

Some finite subcollection of B covers X. If this subcollection contains the set $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { Y }$ discard $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { Y }$ ; otherwise, leave the subcollection alone.The resulting collection is a finite subcollection of A that covers Y. ■

## Theorem 26.3. Every compact subspace of a Hausdorff space is closed.

Proof.Let Y be a compact subspace of the Hausdorff space X.We shall prove that $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { \cal Y }$ is open,so that Y is closed.

Let $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ be a point of $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { Y }$ .We show there is a neighborhood of xo that is disjoint from Y.For each point y of Y,let us choose disjoint neighborhoods $U _ { y }$ and $\nu _ { y }$ of the points xo and y,respectively (using the Hausdorff condition).The collection $\{ V _ { y } \mid y \in$ $\pmb { Y } \}$ is acovering of Y by sets open in X; therefore,finitely many of them $V _ { y _ { 1 } } , \ldots , V _ { y _ { n } }$ cover Y.The open set

$$
V = V _ { y _ { 1 } } \cup \cdot \mathrm { ~  ~ \cup ~ } V _ { y _ { n } }
$$

Contains Y,and it is disjoint from the open set

$$
U = U _ { y _ { 1 } } \cap \dotsc \dotsc \dotsc U _ { y _ { n } }
$$

formed by taking the intersection of the corresponding neighborhoods of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ For if z is a point of V, then $z \in V _ { y _ { t } }$ for somei,hence $z \not \in U _ { y _ { t } }$ and so $z \notin U$ . See Figure 26.1. Then U is a neighborhood of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ disjoint from Y,as desired. ■

<!-- image-->

The statement we proved in the course of the preceding proof will be useful to us later,so we repeat it here for reference purposes:

Lemma 26.4. IfY is a compact subspace of the Hausdorff space X and xo Is not in Y, then there exist disjoint open sets U and V of X containing xo and Y,respectively.

EXAMPLE 5．Once we prove that the interval [a,b] in R is compact, it follows from Theorem 26 2 that any closed subspace of [a,b] is compact. On the other hand,it follows from Theorem 26.3 that the intervals (a,bj and (a,b) in R cannot be compact (which we knew already)because they are not closed in the Hausdorff space R

EXAMPLE 6．One needs the Hausdorff condition in the hypothesis of Theorem 26 3 Consider,for example,the finite complement iopology on the real line The only proper subsets of R that are closed in this topology are the finite sets.But every subset of R is compact in this topology,as you can check.

Theorem 26.5. The image of a compact space under a continuous map is compact.

Proof. Let $f : X \to Y$ be continuous; let X be compact. Let A be a covering of the set $f ( X )$ by sets open in Y.The collection

$$
\{ f ^ { - 1 } ( A ) \mid A \in { \mathcal { A } } \}
$$

is a collection of sets covering X; these sets are open in X because f is continuous. Hence finitely many of them, say

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( A _ { 1 } ) , \ldots , f ^ { - 1 } ( A _ { n } ) ,
$$

cover X.Then the sets $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n }$ cover f(X).