One important use of the preceding theorem is as atool for verifying that a map is a homeomorphism:

Theorem 26.6.Let $f : X \to Y$ be a bijective continuous function If X is compact andYis Hausdorff,thenf isa homeomorphism

Proof.We shall prove that images of closed sets of X under f are closed in Y; this will prove continuity of the map $f ^ { - 1 }$ ． If A is closed in X,then A is compact, by Theorem 26.2. Therefore,by the theorem just proved, $f ( A )$ is compact. Since Y is Hausdorff,f(A) is closed in Y,by Theorem 26.3.

## Theorem 26.7. The product of finitely many compact spaces is compact.

Proof.We shall prove that the product of two compact spaces is compact: the theorem follows by induction for any finite product.

Step1. Suppose that we are given spaces X and Y,with Y compact. Suppose that xo is a point of X,and N is an open set of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ containing the“slice" $\pmb { x } _ { 0 } \times \pmb { Y }$ of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ We prove the following\*

There is a neighborhood W of xo in X such that N contains theentire set W×Y

The set $W \times Y$ is often called a tube about $x _ { 0 } \times Y$

First let us cover $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ by basis elements $U \times V$ (for the topology of $\pmb { X } \times \pmb { Y } )$ lying in N.The space $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ is compact, being homeomorphic to Y. Therefore,we can cover $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ by finitely many such basis elements

$$
U _ { 1 } \times V _ { 1 } , \dots , U _ { n } \times V _ { n }
$$

(We assume that each of the basis elements $U _ { i } \times V _ { i }$ actually intersects $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ ，since otherwise that basis element would be superfluous;we could discard it from the finite collection and still have a covering of $x _ { 0 } \times Y . )$ Define

$$
W = U _ { 1 } \cap \cdot \cdot \ \cap U _ { n }
$$

The set W is open,and it contains xo because each set $U _ { i } \times V _ { i }$ intersects $x _ { 0 } \times Y$

We assert that the sets $U , \times V _ { i }$ ，which were chosen to cover the slice $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ actually cover the tube $W \times Y$ Let $\pmb { x } \ \times \ \pmb { y }$ be a point of $W \times Y$ Consider the point $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 } \times y$ of the slice $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ having the same y-coordinate as this point. Now $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 } \times y$ belongs to $U _ { \ i } \times V _ { i }$ for somei,so that $y \in V _ { i }$ . But $\pmb { \chi } \in U _ { j }$ for every j (because $x \in W )$ Therefore,we have $x \times y \in U _ { i } \times V _ { i }$ ,asdesired.

Since all the sets $U _ { i } \times V _ { i }$ lie in N,and since they cover $W \times Y$ ,the tube $W \times Y$ lies in N also. See Figure 26.2.

Step 2.Now we prove the theorem. Let X and Y be compact spaces.Let A be an open covering of $\pmb { \chi } ~ \times ~ \pmb { Y }$ Given $x _ { 0 } \in X$ ，the slice $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ is compact and may therefore be covered by finitely many elements $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { m }$ of A.Their union $N = A _ { 1 } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup A _ { m }$ is an open set containing $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ ；by Step 1,the open set N contains a tube $W \times Y$ about $\qquad x _ { 0 } \times Y$ ,where W is open in X.Then $W \times Y$ is covered by finitely many elements $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { m }$ of A.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 26.2

Thus,for each x in X,we can choose a neighborhood ${ \pmb W } _ { \pmb { \tau } }$ of x such that the tube $W _ { x } \ \times \ Y$ can be covered by finitely many elements of .A． The collection of all the neighborhoods $W _ { x }$ is an open covering of $\pmb { \chi } _ { \mathrm { i } }$ ：therefore by compactness of $\pmb { \chi }$ ，there exists a finite subcollection

$$
\{ W _ { 1 } , \ldots , W _ { k } \}
$$

covering X. The union of the tubes

$$
W _ { 1 } \times Y , . . . , W _ { k } \times Y
$$

is all of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ ; since each may be covered by finitely many elements of A,so may $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ be covered.

The statement proved in Step l of the preceding proof will be useful to us later, so we repeat it here as a lemma,for reference purposes:

Lemma 26.8 (The tube lemma). Consider the product space $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \cal Y }$ ，where Y is compact.IfN is an open set of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ containing the slice $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \cal Y }$ ,then N contains some tube $W \times Y$ about $x _ { 0 } \times Y$ ,where W is aneighborhood of xo in X.

EXAMPLE7The tube lemma is certainly not true if Y is not compact For example,let Y be the y-axis in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and le1

$$
N = \{ x \times y , | x | < 1 / ( y ^ { 2 } + 1 ) \} .
$$

Then N is an open set containing the set $0 \times \mathbb { R }$ ,but it contains no tube about $0 \times \mathbb { R }$ It is illustrated in Figure 26 3

<!-- image-->  
Figure 26.3

There is an obvious question to ask at this point. Is the product of infinirely many compact spaces compact? One would hope that the answer is “yes,"and in fact it is. The result is important (and difcult) enough to be called by the name of the man who proved it; it is called the Tychonoff theorem

In proving the fact that a cartesian product of connected spaces is connected,one proves it first for finite products and derives the general case from that.Iri proving that cartesian products of compact spaces are compact, however, there is no way to go directly from finite products to infinite ones．The infinite case demands a new approach,and the proof is a difficult one.Because of its difficulty,and also to avoid losing the main thread of our discussion in this chapter,we have decided to postpone it until later. However, you can study it now if you wish; the section in which it is proved (§37)can be studied immediately after this section without causing any disruption in continuity.

There is one final criterion for a space to be compact,a criterion that is formulated in terms of closed sets rather than open setsIt does not look very natural nor very useful at first glance,but it in fact proves to be useful on a number of occasions.First we make a definition.

Definition.A collection C of subsets of X is sad to have the finite intersection property if for every finite subcollection

$$
\{ C _ { 1 } , \ldots , C _ { n } \}
$$

of C,the intersection $C _ { 1 } \cap \cdot \cdot \ \cap C _ { n }$ is nonempty.

Theorem 26.9. Let X be a topological space. Then X is compact if and only if forevery collection C of closed sets in X having the finite intersection property,the intersection $\cap _ { c \in { \mathcal { C } } } c$ of all the elements ofC is nonempty.

Proof.Given a collectuon A of subsets of X,let

$$
{ \mathfrak { C } } = \{ X - A \mid A \in { \mathcal { A } } \}
$$

be the collection of their complements. Then the following statements hold:

(l）Ais a collection of open sets if and only if C is a collection of closed sets.

(2）The collection A covers X if and only if the intersection $\cap _ { c \in ^ { \circ } } C$ of all the elements of C is empty

(3）The finite subcollection $\{ A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n } \}$ of A covers X if and only if the intersection of the corresponding elements $C _ { \iota } = \pmb { X } - \pmb { A } _ { i }$ of C is empty.

The first statement is trivial, while the second and third follow from DeMorgan's law:

$$
X - ( \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha } ) = \bigcap _ { \alpha \in J } ( X - A _ { \alpha } ) .
$$

The proof of the theorem now proceeds in two easy steps: taking the contrapositive (of the theorem),and then the complement (of the sets)!

The statement that X is compact is equivalent to saying:“Given any collection A of open subsets of X,if A covers X,then some finite subcollection of A covers X." This statement is equivalent to its contraposituve,which is the following:“Given any collection A of open sets,if no finite subcollection of A covers X,then A does not cover $\pmb { \chi } . \pmb { \mathrm { \Omega } } ^ { \pmb { \mathrm { \prime } } }$ Lettng C be,as earlier,the collection $\{ X - A \mid A \in { \mathcal { A } } \}$ and applying (1)-(3), we see that this statement is in turn equivalent to the following: "Given any collecuon C of closed sets,if every finite intersection of elements of C is nonempty, then the intersection of all the elements of C is nonempty.’This is just the condition of our theorem. □

A special case of this theorem occurs when we have a nested sequence $C _ { 1 } \supset C _ { 2 } \supset$ $\cdots \supset C _ { n } \supset C _ { n + 1 } \supset \ldots$ of closed sets in a compact space X.If each of the sets $C _ { n }$ is nonempty, then the collection ${ \mathcal { C } } = \{ C _ { n } \} _ { n \in { \mathbb { Z } } } .$ automatically has the finite intersection property. Then the intersecton

$$
\bigcap _ { n \in \mathbf { Z } _ { + } } C _ { n }
$$

is nonempty.

We shall use the closed set criterion for compactness in the next section to prove the uncountability of the set of real numbers,in Chapter 5 when we prove the Tychonoff theorem,and again in Chapter 8 when we prove the Baire category theorem.

## Exercises

1. (a) Let $\mathcal { T }$ and ${ \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ be two topologies on the set $\pmb { \chi }$ suppose that $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime } \supset \mathcal { T }$ . What does compactness of X under one of these topologies imply about compactness under the other?

(b) Show that if X is compact Hausdorff under both $\mathcal { T }$ and $\scriptstyle { \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ ,then either $\mathcal { T }$ and ${ \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ are equal or they are not comparable.

2. (a） Show that in the finite complement topology on R,every subspace is compact.

(b)If R has the topology consistng of all sets A such that $\mathbb { R } - A$ is either countable or all of R,is [O, I] a compact subspace?

3. Show that a finite union of compact subspaces of X is compact.

4.Show that every compact subspace of a metric space is bounded in that metric and is closed. Find a metric space in which not every closed bounded subspace is compact.

5.Let A and B be disjoint compact subspaces of the Hausdorff space X. Show that there exist disjoint open sets U and V containing A and B,respectively.

6.Show that if $f : X \to Y$ is continuous,where X is compact and Y is Hausdorff, then f is a closed map (that is,f carries closed sets to closed sets).

7. Show that if Y is compact, then the projection $\pi _ { 1 } : X \times Y \to X$ is a closed map.

8.Theorem. Let $f : X \to Y .$ : letY be compact Hausdorff. Then f is contnuous if and only if the graph of f,

$$
G _ { f } = \{ x \times f ( x ) \mid x \in X \} ,
$$

is closed in $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ [Hint: If $G _ { f }$ is closed and V is a neighborhood of $f ( x _ { 0 } )$ then the intersection of $G _ { f }$ and $\pmb { X } \times ( \pmb { Y } - \pmb { V } )$ is closed. Apply Exercise 7.]

9. Generalize the tube lemma as follows:

Theorem. Let A and B be subspaces of X andY,respectively; let N be an open set in $\chi \times Y$ containing $A \times B$ .If Aand B are compact, then there exist open sets U and V in X and Y,respectively,such that

$$
A \times B \subset U \times V \subset N .
$$

10.(a）Prove the following partial converse to the uniform limit theorem:

Theorem. Let $f _ { n } : X \to \mathbb { R }$ be a sequence of continuous functions,with $f _ { n } ( x ) \to f ( x )$ for each ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$ .If f is continuous,and if the sequence $f _ { n }$ is monotone increasing,and if X is compact, then the convergence is uniform. [We say that $f _ { n }$ is monotone increasing if $f _ { n } ( x ) \leq f _ { n + 1 } ( x )$ for all n and x.] (b) Give examples to show that this theorem fails if you delete the requirement that X be compact, or if you delete the requirement that the sequence be monotone.[Hint: See the exercises of \$21.]

11.Theorem. Let X be a compact Hausdorff space.Let A be a collection of closed connected subsets of X that is simply ordered by proper inclusion.Then

$$
Y = \bigcap _ { A \in \mathcal { A } } A
$$

is connected. [Hint: If C U D is a separation of Y,choose disjoint open sets U and V of X containing C and D,respectively,and show that

$$
\bigcap _ { A \in { \mathcal { A } } } ( A - ( U \cup V ) )
$$

is not empty.]

12. Let $p : X \to Y$ be a closed continuous surjective map such that $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} )$ is compact,for each $y \in Y$ .(Such a map is called a perfect map ） Show that if Y is compact,then X is compact.[Hint: If U is an open set containing $p ^ { - 1 } ( \{ y \} )$ there isa neighborhood W ofy such that $p ^ { - 1 } ( W )$ is contained in U]

13. Let G be a topological group.

(a)Let A and B be subspaces of G.If A is closed and B is compact, show A ·B is closed.[Hint: If c is not in A·B,find a neighborhood W of c such that $W \cdot B ^ { - 1 }$ is disjoint from A.]

(b) Let H be a subgroup of G; let $\pmb { p } \cdot \pmb { G }  \pmb { G } / H$ be the quotient map. If H is compact, show that p is a closed map.

(c）Let H be a compact subgroup of G. Show that if $G / H$ is compact, then G is compact.

## \$27Compact Subspaces of the Real Line

The theorems of the preceding section enable us to construct new compact spaces from existing ones,but in order to get very far we have to find some compact spaces to start with.The natural place to begin is the real line;we shall prove that every closed interval in R is compact.Applications include the extreme value theorem and the uniform continuity theorem of calculus,suitably generalized.We also give a characterization of all compact subspaces of R",and a proof of the uncountability of the set of real numbers.

It turns out that in order to prove every closed interval in R is compact,we need only one of the order properties of the real line-the least upper bound property. We shall prove the theorem using only this hypothesis;then it will apply not only to the real lne,but to well-ordered sets and other ordered sets as well.

Theorem 27.1. Let X be a simply ordered set having the least upper bound property.   
In the order topology, each closed interval in X is compact.

Proof.Step 1.Given $a < b$ ,let A be a covering of [a,b] by sets open in [a,b] in the subspace topology (which is the same as the order topology).We wish to prove the existence of a finite subcollecuon of A covering [a,bj.First we prove the following: If x is a point of [a,b] different from b,then there is a point $y > x$ of $[ a , b ]$ such that the interval [x,y] can be covered by at most two elements of A

If x has an immediate successor in X,let y be this immediate successor. Then $[ x , y ]$ consists of the two points x and y,so that it can be covered by at most two elements of A. If x has no immediate successor in X,choose an element A of A containing x.Because $x \neq b$ and A is open,A contains an interval of the form [x,c), for some c in [a,b]. Choose a point y in (x,c); then the interval [x,yl is covered by the single element A of A.

Step 2.Let C be the set of all points $y > a$ of $\left[ a , b \right]$ such that the interval [a,y] can be covered by finitely many elements of A Applying Step l to the case $x = a$ we see that there eXists at least one such y,so C is not empty. Let c be the least upper bound of the set $c$ ：then $a < c \leq b$

Step 3.We show that c belongs to C; that is,we show that the interval [a,c] can be covered by finitely many elements of A. Choose an element A of $\pmb { \mathcal { A } }$ containing $c ;$ since A is open,it contains an interval of the form $( d , c ]$ for some d in $[ a , b ]$ If $\pmb { c }$ is not in C,there must be a point z of C lying in the interval $( d , c )$ ,because otherwise d would be a smaller upper bound on C than c. See Figure 27.1. Since z is in $c$ the interval $[ a , z ]$ can be covered by finitely many,say n,elements of ${ \star } .$ Now [z,c] lies in the single element $\pmb { A }$ of $\star$ hence $[ a , c ] = [ a , z ] \cup [ z , c ]$ can be covered by $n + 1$ elements of A. Thus c is in $c$ ,contrary to assumption.

<!-- image-->

Step 4.Finally,we show that $c = b .$ ，and our theorem is proved. Suppose that $c < b .$ Applying Step 1 to the case $x = c ,$ ，we conclude that there exists a point $y > c$ of $\left[ a , b \right]$ such that the interval $\left[ \pmb { c } , \pmb { y } \right]$ can be covered by finitely many elements of .A. See Figure 27.2. We proved in Step 3 that c is in C,so [a,c] can be covered by finitely many elements of A.Therefore,the interval

$$
[ a , y ] = [ a , c ] \cup [ c , y ]
$$

can also be covered by finitely many elements of A. This means that y is in $c .$ contradicting the fact that c is an upper bound on $c$

Corollary 27.2.Every closed interval in R is compact.

Now we charactenze the compact subspaces of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ：：

Theorem 27.3. A subspace A of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ is compact if and only if it is closed and is bounded in the euclidean metric d or the square metric $\rho$

Proof.It will suffice to consider only the metric $\rho ;$ the inequalities

$$
\rho ( x , y ) \leq d ( x , y ) \leq { \sqrt { n } } \rho ( x , y )
$$

imply that A is bounded under d if and only if it is bounded under $\rho$

Suppose that A is compact. Then,by Theorem 26.3,it is closed.Consider the collection of open sets

$$
\{ B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { 0 } , m ) \mid m \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} ,
$$

whose union is all of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ . Some finite subcollection covers A It follows that $_ { A \subset }$ $B _ { \rho } ( \boldsymbol { \mathbf { 0 } } , M )$ for some M.Therefore,for any two points x and y of A,we have $\rho ( x , y ) \leq$ 2M.Thus A is bounded under $\pmb { \rho } .$

Conversely, suppose that A is closed and bounded under $\rho ;$ suppose that $\rho ( x , y ) \leq$ N for every pair x、y of points of A. Choose a point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ of A, and let $\rho ( x _ { 0 } , \mathbf { 0 } ) = b$ The triangle inequality implies that $\rho ( x , \mathbf { 0 } ) \leq N + b$ for every x in A.If $\pmb { P } = \pmb { N } + \pmb { b }$ then A is a subset of the cube $\{ - P , P \} ^ { n }$ ，which is compact.Being closed,A is also compact.

Students often remember this theorem as stating that the collection of compact sets in a metric space equals the collection of closed and bounded sets.Thus statement is clearly ridiculous as it stands, because the question as to which sets are bounded depends for its ans wer on the metric,whereas which sets are compact depends only on the topology of the space.

EXAMPLE 1 The unit sphere $\bar { S } ^ { n - 1 }$ and the closed unit ball $B ^ { n }$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ are compact because they are closed and bounded.The set

$$
A = \{ x \times ( 1 / x ) \mid 0 < x \leq 1 \}
$$

is closed in $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 }$ ,but it is not compact because it is not bounded. The set

$$
S = \{ x \times ( \sin ( 1 / x ) ) \mid 0 < x \leq 1 \}
$$

is bounded in $\Re ^ { 2 }$ ,but it is not compact because it is not closed

Now we prove the extreme value theorem of calculus,in suitably generalized form.

Theorem 27.4 (Extreme value theorem). Let $f \mathrm { ~ . ~ } X  Y$ be continuous,where Y is an ordered set in the order topology. If X is compact,then there exist points c and d in X such that $f ( c ) \leq f ( x ) \leq f ( d )$ for every x ∈ X.

The extreme value theorem of calculus is the special case of this theorem that occurs when we take X to be a closed interval in R and Y to be R.

Proof.Since f is continuous and X is compact, the set $\boldsymbol { A } = f ( \boldsymbol { X } )$ is compact. We show that A has a largest element M and a smallest element m. Then since m and M belong to A,we must have $m = f ( c )$ and $M = f ( d )$ for some points c and d of X.

If A has no largest element, then the collection

$$
\{ ( - \infty , a ) \mid a \in A \}
$$

forms an open covering of A. Since A is compact, some finite subcollection

$$
\{ ( - \infty , a _ { 1 } ) , \ldots , ( - \infty , a _ { n } ) \}
$$

covers A If ${ \pmb a } _ { i }$ is the largest of the elements $a _ { 1 } , \ldots a _ { n }$ ,then ${ \pmb a } _ { t }$ belongs to none of these sets,contrary to the fact that they cover A.

A similar argument shows that A has a smallest element.

Now we prove the uniform continuity theorem of calculus. In the process， we are led to introduce a new notion that will prove to be surprisingly useful, that of a Lebesgue number for an open covering of a metric space.First, a preliminary notion:

Definition.Let $( X , d )$ be a metric space; let A be a nonempty subset of X. For each $x \in X$ ,we define the distance from x to A by the equation

$$
d ( x , A ) = \operatorname* { i n f } \{ d ( x , a ) \mid a \in A \} .
$$

It is easy to show that for fixed A,the function $d ( x , A )$ is a continuous function of x: Given x, $y \in X$ ,one has the inequalities

$$
d ( x , A ) \leq d ( x , a ) \leq d ( x , y ) + d ( y , a ) ,
$$

for each $a \in A$ It follows that

$$
d ( x , A ) - d ( x , y ) \leq \operatorname* { i n f } d ( y , a ) = d ( y , A ) ,
$$

so that

$$
d ( x , A ) - d ( y , A ) \leq d ( x , y ) .
$$

The same inequality holds with x and y interchanged; continuity of the function $d ( x , A )$ follows.

Now we introduce the notion of Lebesgue number. Recall that the diameter of a bounded subset A of a metric space $( X , d )$ is the number

$$
\operatorname* { s u p } \{ d ( a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } ) \mid a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } \in A \} .
$$

Lemma 27.5 (The Lebesgue number lemma). Let A be an open covering of the metric space (X,d). If X is compact, there is a $\delta > 0$ such that for each subset of X having diameter less than δ,there exists an element of A containing it.

The number & is called a Lebesgue number for the covering A.

Proof.Let A be an open covering of X. If X itself is an element of A, then any positive number is a Lebesgue number for A. So assume X is not an element of A.

Choose a finite subcollection $\{ A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n } \}$ of A that covers X.For each i,set $C _ { i } = { \pmb X } - { \pmb A } _ { i }$ ,and define $f : X \to \mathbb { R }$ by letting f(x) be the average of the numbers $d ( x , C _ { t } )$ .That is,

$$
f ( x ) = \frac { 1 } { n } \sum _ { \ i = 1 } ^ { n } d ( x , C _ { \ i } ) .
$$

We show that $f ( x ) > 0$ for all x. Given ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$ ,choosei so that $\pmb { x } \in \pmb { A } _ { i }$ . Then choose e so the E-neighborhood of x lies in $A _ { i }$ . Then $d ( x , C _ { i } ) \geq \epsilon$ so that $f ( x ) \geq \epsilon / n$

Since f is continuous,it has a minimum value $\delta ;$ we show that & is our required Lebesgue number Let B be a subset of X of diameter less than δ.Choose a point $\pmb { x } _ { 0 }$ of $\pmb { B } .$ ,then B lies in the δ-neighborhood of xo.Now

$$
\delta \leq f ( x _ { 0 } ) \leq d ( x _ { 0 } , C _ { m } ) ,
$$

where $d ( x _ { 0 } , C _ { m } )$ is the largest of the numbers $d ( x _ { 0 } , C _ { \iota } )$ ．Then the δ-neighborhood of $\pmb { x } _ { 0 }$ is contained in the element $\pmb { A _ { m } } = \pmb { X } - \pmb { C _ { m } }$ of the covering A.

Definition.A function f from the metnc space $( X , d _ { X } )$ to the metric space $( Y , d _ { Y } )$ is said to be uniformly continuous if given $\epsilon > 0$ there isa $\delta > 0$ such that for every pair of points $x _ { 0 } , x _ { 1 }$ of X,

$$
d _ { X } ( x _ { 0 } , x _ { 1 } ) < \delta \Longrightarrow d _ { Y } ( f ( x _ { 0 } ) , f ( x _ { 1 } ) ) < \epsilon
$$

Theorem 27.6 (Uniform continuity theorem). Let $f \ . \ X \to Y$ be a continuous map of the compact metric space $( X , d _ { X } )$ to the metric space $( Y , d _ { Y } )$ .Then f is uniformly continuous.

Proof.Given $\epsilon > 0$ ,take the open covering of Y by balls $B ( y , \epsilon / 2 )$ of radius $\epsilon / 2$ Let A be the open covering of X by the inverse images of these balls under f. Choose & to be a Lebesgue number for the covering A. Then if $x _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { x } _ { 2 }$ are two points of X such that $d _ { X } ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } ) < \delta$ ,the two-point set $\{ x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } \}$ has diameter less than δ,so that its image $\{ f ( x _ { 1 } ) , f ( x _ { 2 } ) \}$ lies in some ball $B ( \mathbf { y } , \epsilon / 2 )$ . Then d $\dot { \gamma } ( f ( x _ { 1 } ) , f ( x _ { 2 } ) ) < \epsilon$ ,as desired ■

Finally， we prove that the real numbers are uncountable. The interesting thing about this proof is that it involves no algebraat all-no decimal or binary expansions of real numbers or the like-just the order properties of R.

Definition.If X is a space,a point x of X is said to be an isolated point of X if the one-point set {x) is open in X

Theorem 27.7． Let X be a nonempty compact Hausdorff space. If X has no isolated points,then X is uncountable.

Proof. Step l. We show first that given any nonempty open set U of X and any point x of X,there exists a nonempty open set V contained in U such that $x \notin { \bar { V } }$

Choose a point y of U different from x; this is possible if x is in U because x is not an isolated point of X and it is possble if x is not in U simply because U is nonempty. Now choose disjoint open sets $W _ { 1 }$ and ${ \pmb W } _ { 2 }$ about x and y,respectively. Then the set $V = W _ { 2 } \cap U$ is the desired open set,it is contained in U,it is nonempty because it contains y,and its closure does not contain x See Figure 27.3

Step 2.We show that given $f : \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \to X$ ,the function f is not surjective.It follows that X is uncountable

<!-- image-->  
Figure 27.3

Let $\scriptstyle x _ { n } \ = \ f ( n )$ .Apply Step l to_the nonempty open set $U = X$ to choose a nonempty open set $\pmb { V } _ { 1 } \subset \pmb { X }$ such that $\bar { V } _ { 1 }$ does not contain $x _ { 1 }$ . In general, gi ven $V _ { n - 1 }$ open and nonempty,choose $V _ { n }$ to be a nonempty open set such that $V _ { n } \subset V _ { n - 1 }$ and $\bar { \nu } _ { n }$ does not contain ${ \pmb x } _ { \pmb n }$ . Consider the nested sequence

$$
\bar { V } _ { 1 } \supset \bar { V } _ { 2 } \supset \cdots
$$

of nonempty closed sets of X.Because X is compact, there is a point $x \in \cap { \bar { V } } _ { n }$ ,by Theorem 26.9. Now x cannot equal $x _ { n }$ for any n,since x belongs to $\bar { V } _ { \pmb { n } }$ and $x _ { n }$ does not. ■

Corollary 27.8. Every closed interval in R is uncountable.

## Exercises

1.Prove that if X is an ordered set in which every closed interval is compact, then X has the least upper bound property.

2. Let X be a metric space with metric $\pmb { d } ;$ let $A \subset X$ be nonempty.

(a） Show that $d ( x , A ) = 0$ if and only if $x \in { \vec { A } }$

(b） Show that if A is compact, $d ( x , A ) = d ( x , a )$ for some $a \in A$

(c）Define the ∈-neighborhood of A in X to be the set

$$
U ( A , \epsilon ) = \{ x \mid d ( x , A ) < \epsilon \} .
$$

Show that $U ( A , \epsilon )$ equals the union of the open balls $B _ { d } ( a , \epsilon )$ for ${ \pmb a } \in { \pmb A }$

(d)Assume that A is compact; let U be an open set containing A.Show that some ∈-neighborhood of A is contained in U.

(e) Show the result in (d) need not hold if A is closed but not compact.

3. Recall that $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ denotes R in the K-topology.

(a） Show that [O,1] is not compact as a subspace of $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$

(b) Show that $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ is connected. [Hint $( - \infty , 0 )$ and $( 0 , \infty )$ inherit their usual topologies as subspaces of $\mathbb { R } _ { K } .$ 一

(c） Show that $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$ is not path connected.

4. Show that a connected metric space having more than one point is uncountable.

5.Let X be a compact Hausdorff space,let $\left\{ A _ { n } \right\}$ be a countable collection of closed sets of X. Show that if each set $A _ { n }$ has empty interior in $\pmb { \chi }$ ,then the union $\bigcup A _ { n }$ has empty interior in X. [Hint: Imutate the proof of Theorem 27.7.]

This is a special case of the Baire category theorem,which we shall study in Chapter 8.

6. Let $A _ { 0 }$ be the closed interval [0,1] in R. Let $\pmb { A } _ { 1 }$ be the set obtained from $A _ { 0 }$ by deletng its"middle third" $( \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 2 } { 3 } )$ . Let $\pmb { A } _ { 2 }$ be the set obtained from $\pmb { A } _ { 1 }$ by deleting its"middle thirds" $( \frac { 1 } { 9 } , \frac { 2 } { 9 } )$ and $( \frac { 7 } { 9 } , \frac { 8 } { 9 } )$ In general, define $A _ { n }$ by the equation

$$
A _ { n } = A _ { n - 1 } - \bigcup _ { k = 0 } ^ { \infty } \left( { \frac { 1 + 3 k } { 3 ^ { n } } } , { \frac { 2 + 3 k } { 3 ^ { n } } } \right) .
$$

The intersection

$$
C = \bigcap _ { n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } } A _ { n }
$$

is called the Cantor set; it is a subspace of [0.1]

(a） Show that C is totally disconnected.

(b） Show that C is compact.

(c） Show that each set $A _ { n }$ is a union of finitely many disjoint closed intervals of length $1 / 3 ^ { n }$ ; and show that the end points of these intervals lie in C.

(d) Show that C has no isolated points.

(e） Conclude that C is uncountable.

## \$28 Limit Point Compactness

As indicated when we first mentioned compact sets,there are other formulations of the notion of compactness that are frequently useful. In this section we introduce one of them.Weaker in general than compactness,it coincides with compactness for metrizable spaces.

Definition. A space X is said to be limit point compact if every infinite subset of X has a limut point.

In some ways this property is more natural and intuitive than that of compactness. In the early days of topology, it was given the name “compactness,’while the open covering formulation was called “bicompactness.”Later,the word “compact”was shifted to apply to the open covering definition,leaving this one to search for a new name It still has not found a name on which everyone agrees On historical grounds, some call it "Frechet compactness", others callit the "Bolzano-Weierstrass property" We have invented the term “limut point compactness ” It seems as good a term as any; at least it describes what the property is about.

## Theorem 28.1.Compactness implies limut point compactness,but not conversely

Proof.Let X be a compact space. Given a subset A of X,we wish to prove that if A is infinite,then A has a limit point.We prove the contrapositve-if A has no limut point,then A must be finite.

So suppose A has no limit point. Then A contains allits limit points,so that A is closed.Furthermore,for each $a \in A$ we can choose a neighborhood $U _ { \pmb { a } }$ of a such that $U _ { \pmb { a } }$ intersects A in the point a alone The space X is covered by the open set $X - A$ and the open sets $U _ { a }$ ; being compact, it can be covered by finitely many of these sets. Since $X - A$ does not intersect A,and each set $U _ { \pmb { a } }$ contains only one point of A,the set A must be finite. □

EXAMPLE 1 Let Y consist of two points,give Y the topology consisting of Y and the empty set Then the space $\pmb { x } = \pmb { \mathbb { Z } } _ { + } \times \pmb { Y }$ is limit point compact,for every nonempty subset of X has a limit point.lt is not compact,for the covenng of X by the open sets $U _ { n } = [ n \} \times Y$ has no finite subcollectuon covering X

EXAMPLE 2Here is a less trivial example Consider the minimal uncountable wellordered set $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ ,in the order topology The space ${ \pmb S } _ { \Omega }$ is not compact,since it has no largest element However, it is limit point compact'Let A be an infinite subset of ${ \pmb S } _ { \Omega }$ Choose a subset B of A that is countably infinite Being countable,the set B has an upper bound b in $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ thenBisa subset of the interval $\left[ a _ { 0 } , b \right]$ of $s _ { \alpha }$ where ${ \pmb a } _ { \mathbf { 0 } }$ is the smallest element of $s _ { \alpha }$ . Since $s _ { \Omega }$ has the least upper bound property,the interval [ao,bl is compact By the preceding theorem,B has a limit point x in [ao,b].The point x is also a limit point of A Thus $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ is limit point compact

We now show these two versions of compactness coincide for metrizable spaces; for this purpose,we introduce yet another version of compactness called sequential compactness.This result will be used in Chapter 7.

Definition. Let X be a topological space. If $( x _ { n } )$ is a sequence of points of X,and if

$$
n _ { 1 } < n _ { 2 } < \cdot \cdot < n _ { i } < \cdot \cdot
$$

is an increasing sequence of positive integers,then the sequence $( y _ { i } )$ defined by setting $y _ { i } \ = \ x _ { n _ { i } }$ is called a subsequence of the sequence $( x _ { n } )$ .The space X is said to be sequentially compact if every sequence of points of X has a convergent subsequence.

\*Theorem 28.2. Let X be a metrizable space. Then the following are equivalent:

(1） X is compact.

(2）X is limit point compact.

(3）X is sequentially compact.

Proof.We have already proved that $( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 2 )$ .To show that $( 2 ) \Rightarrow ( 3 )$ ,assume that X is limit point compact. Given a sequence $( x _ { n } )$ of points of X,consider the set $A = \{ x _ { n } \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ 、If the set A is finite,then there is a point x such that ${ \mathfrak { x } } = { \mathfrak { x } } _ { n }$ for infinitely many values of n. In this case,the sequence $( x _ { n } )$ has a subsequence that is constant,and therefore converges trivially. On the other hand,if A is infinite,then A has a limit point x.We define a subsequence of $( x _ { n } )$ Convergingto x as follows:First choose $\pmb { n } _ { 1 }$ so that

$$
x _ { n _ { 1 } } \in B ( x , 1 ) .
$$

Then suppose that the positive integer $n _ { i - 1 }$ is given. Because the ball $B ( x , 1 / i )$ intersects A in infinitely many points,we can choose an index $n _ { i } > { \pmb n } _ { i - 1 }$ such that

$$
x _ { n _ { i } } \in B ( x , 1 / \imath ) .
$$

Then the subsequence $x _ { n _ { 1 } } , x _ { n _ { 2 } } , \ldots ,$ converges to x.

Finally, we show that $( 3 ) \Rightarrow ( 1 )$ . This is the hardest part of the proof.

First,we show that if X is sequentially compact, then the Lebesgue number lemma holds for X.(This would follow from compactness,but compactness is what we are trying to prove!) Let A be an open covering of X.We assume that there is no $\delta > 0$ such that each set of diameter less than δ has an element of A containing it,and derive a contradiction.

Our assumption implies in particular that for each positive integer n,there exists a set of diameter less than $1 / n$ that is not contained in any element of $\star ;$ let $C _ { n }$ be such a set. Choose a point $x _ { n } \in C _ { n }$ ,for each n.By hypothesis,some subsequence $( x _ { n _ { i } } )$ of the sequence $( x _ { n } )$ converges,say to the point a. Now a belongs to some element A of the collection ${ \star } ;$ because A is open,we may choose an $\epsilon > 0$ such that $B ( a , \epsilon ) \subset A$ Ifi is large enough that $1 / n _ { i } < \epsilon / 2$ ,then the set $C _ { n _ { i } }$ lies in the∈/2-neighborhood of $x _ { n _ { \ell } }$ ;if i is also chosen large enough that $d ( x _ { n _ { t } } , a ) < \epsilon / 2$ ,then $C _ { n _ { i } }$ lies in the ∈-neighborhood of a.But this means that $C _ { n _ { t } } \subset A$ ,contrary to hypothesis.

Second,we show that if X is sequentially compact,then given $\epsilon > 0$ ,there exists a finite covering of X by open ∈-balls.Once again，we proceed by contradiction. Assume that there exists an $\epsilon > 0$ such that X cannot be covered by finitely many E-balls. Construct a sequence of points $x _ { n }$ of X as follows: First, choose $x _ { 1 }$ to be any point of X.Noting that the ball $B ( x _ { 1 } , \epsilon )$ is not all of X(otherwise X could be covered bya single ∈-ball),choose $\pmb { x } _ { 2 }$ to be a point of X not in $B ( x _ { 1 } , \epsilon )$ . In general, given $x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n }$ ,choose $x _ { n + 1 }$ to be a point not in the union

$$
B ( x _ { 1 } , \epsilon ) \cup \dots \cup B ( x _ { n } , \epsilon ) ,
$$

using the fact that these balls do not cover X.Note that by construction $d ( x _ { n + 1 } , x _ { i } ) \geq$ efor $i = 1 , \ldots , n$ 、Therefore,the sequence $( x _ { n } )$ can have no convergent subsequence; in fact,any ballof radius $\epsilon / 2$ can contain $x _ { n }$ for at most one value of n.

Finally, we show that if X is sequentially compact, then X is compact. Let A be an open covering of X. Because X is sequentially compact,the open covering A has a Lebesgue number δ. Let $\epsilon = \delta / 3$ use sequential compactness of X to find a finite coverng of X by open ∈-bals. Each of these balls has diameter at most $2 \delta / 3$ ,so it lies in an element of A.Choosing one such element of A for each of these ∈-balls, we obtain a finite subcollecton of A that covers X.

EXAMPLE3.Recall that $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ denotes the minimal uncountable well-ordered set $s _ { \Omega }$ with the point Ωadjoined.(In the order topology, is alimit point of $s _ { \Omega }$ which is why we introduced the notation $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ for $\pmb { S } _ { \pmb { \Omega } } \cup$ {2},back in \$1O）It is easy to see that the space $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$ is not metrizable,for it does not satisfy the sequence lemma:The point Ω is a limut point of $s _ { \Omega }$ ,but it is not the limit of a sequence of points of $s _ { \Omega }$ ,for any sequence of points of $s _ { \mathfrak { a } }$ has an upper bound in $s _ { \mathfrak { a } }$ The space $s _ { \Omega }$ ，on the other hand,does satisfy the sequence lemma,as you can readily check Nevertheless, $s _ { \mathfrak { a } }$ is not metnzable,for it is limut point compact but not compact.

## Exercises

1.Give [O,l]" the uniform topology.Find an infinite subset of this space that has no limut point

2. Show that [O,l] is not limit point compact as a subspace of $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell }$

3. Let X be limit point compact.

(a) $I f f \cdot X \to Y$ is continuous,does it follow that $f ( X )$ is limut point compact?

(b) If A is a closed subset of X,does it follow that A is limit point compact?

(c)If X is a subspace of the Hausdorff space Z,does it follow that X is closed in Z?

We comment that it is not in general true that the product of two limit point compact spaces is limit point compact, even if the Hausdorff condition is assumed. But the examples are fairly sophisticated. See [S-S], Example II2.

4. A space X is said to be countably compact if every countable open covering of X contains a finite subcollection that covers X.Show that for a $T _ { 1 }$ space X, countable compactness is equivalent to limut point compactness. [Hint: If no finite subcollection of $U _ { n }$ covers X,choose $x _ { n } \notin U _ { 1 } \cup \ldots \cup U _ { n }$ , for each n.]

5.Show that X is countably compact if and only if every nested sequence $c _ { 1 } \supset$ $c _ { 2 } \supset$ · of closed nonempty sets of X has a nonempty intersection.

6. Let (X,d) be a metric space. If $f : X \to X$ satisfies the condition

$$
d ( f ( x ) , f ( y ) ) = d ( x , y )
$$

for all $x , y \in X$ ,then f iscalled an isometry of X.Show that if f is an isometry and X is compact,then f is bijective and hence a homeomorphism. [Hint: If a $\not \Et ( X )$ ,choose ∈ so that the ∈-neighborhood of a is disjoint from $f ( X )$ Set $\pmb { x } _ { 1 } = \pmb { a }$ ,and $x _ { n + 1 } = f ( x _ { n } )$ in general. Show that $d ( x _ { n } , x _ { m } ) \geq \epsilon$ for $n \not = m . ]$

7. Let (X,d) be a metnc space.If f satisfes the condition

$$
d ( f ( x ) , f ( y ) ) < d ( x , y )
$$

for all $x , y \in X$ with $x \neq y$ ,then f is called a shrinking map If there is a number $\alpha < 1$ such that

$$
d ( f ( x ) , f ( y ) ) \leq \alpha d ( x , y )
$$

for all $x , y \in X$ ,then f is called a contraction. A fixed point of f is a point x such that $f ( x ) = x$

(a)If f is a contraction and X is compact,show f has a unique fixed point. [Hint:Define $f ^ { ! } = f$ and $f ^ { n + 1 } = f \circ f ^ { n }$ .Consider the intersection A of the sets $A _ { n } = f ^ { n } ( X ) . ]$

(b) Show more generally that if f is a shrinking map and X is compact,then f has a unique fixed point.[Hint: Let A be as before.Given $x \in A$ ,choose $x _ { n }$ so that $x = f ^ { n + 1 } ( x _ { n } )$ . If a is the limit of some subsequence of the sequence $y _ { n } = f ^ { n } ( x _ { n } )$ ,show that ${ \pmb a } \in \pmb { A }$ and $f ( a ) = x$ .Conclude that $A = f ( A )$ ,So that diam $A = 0 . 1$

(c） Let $X \ = \ [ 0 , 1 ]$ .Show that $f ( x ) = x - x ^ { 2 } / 2$ maps X into X and is a shrinking map that is not a contraction. [Hint· Use the mean-value theorem of calculus.]

(d)The result in (a) holds if X is a complete metric space,such as R;see the exercises of S43. The result in (b) does not. Show that the map $f \cdot \mathbb { R } \to$ R given by $f ( x ) = [ x + ( x ^ { 2 } + 1 ) ^ { 1 / 2 } ] / 2$ is a shrinking map that is not a contraction and has no fixed point.

## \$29 Local Compactness

In this section we study the notion of local compactness,and we prove the basic theorem that any locally compact Hausdorff space can be imbedded in a certain compact Hausdorff space that is called its one-point compactification.

Definition.A space X is said to be locally compact at x if there is some compact subspace C of X that contains a neighborhood of x. If X is locally compact at each of its points, X is said simply to be locally compact.

Note that a compact space is automatically locally compact.

EXAMPLE1The real line R is locally compact. The point x lies in some interval $( a , b )$ which in turn is contained in the compact subspace [a,b] The subspace Q of rational numbers is not locally compacl,as you can check.

EXAMPLE2 The space $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ is locally compact,the point x lies in some basis element $\begin{array} { r l } { ( a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ) \times \ } & { { } \cdot \times \left( a _ { n } , b _ { n } \right) } \end{array}$ ,which in tum lies in the compact subspace $[ a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ] \times \ \cdot \ \times [ a _ { n } , b _ { n } ]$ The space R" is not locally compact, none of its basis elements are contained in compact subspaces For if

$$
\begin{array} { r } { B = ( a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ) \times \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ } \times ( a _ { n } , b _ { n } ) \times \mathbb { R } \times \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ } \times \mathbb { R } \times } \end{array}
$$

were contained in a compact subspace, then its closure

$$
\bar { B } = [ a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ] \times \mathrm { ~  ~ \sigma ~ } \cdot \times \{ a _ { n } , b _ { n } \} \times { \mathbb R } \times \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ }
$$

would be compact, which it is not.

EXAMPLE 3.Every simply ordered set X having the least upper bound property is locally compact: Given a basis element for X,it is contained in a closed interval in X, which is compact.

Two of the most well-behaved classes of spaces to deal with in mathematics are the metrizable spaces and the compact Hausdorff spaces. Such spaces have many useful properties,which one can use in proving theorems and making constructioris and the like. If a given space is not of one of these types,the next best thing one can hope for is that it is a subspace of one of these spaces.Of course,a subspace of a metrizable space is itself metrizable,so one does not get any new spaces in this way.But a subspace of a compact Hausdorff space need not be compact. Thus arises the question: Under what conditions is a space homeomorphic with a subspace of a compact Hausdorff space? We give one answer here.We shall return to this question in Chapter 5 when we study compactifications in general.

Theorem 29.1.Let X be a space.Then X is locally compact Hausdorff if and only if there exists a space Y satisfying the following conditions:

(1） X is a subspace of Y.

(2） The set $Y - X$ consists of a single point.

(3)Y is a compact Hausdorff space.

If Y and $\pmb { Y } ^ { \prime }$ are two spaces satisfying these conditions,then there is a homeomorphism of Y with $\pmb { Y } ^ { \prime }$ that equals the identity map on X.

Proof.Step 1. We first venfy uniqueness. Let Y and $\gamma \prime$ be two spaces satisfying these conditions.Define $h : Y \to Y ^ { \prime }$ by letting h map the single point p of $Y - X$ to the point $q$ of $Y ^ { \prime } - X$ ,and letng h equal the identity on $\pmb { \chi }$ We show that if U is open in Y,then $h ( U )$ is open in $\gamma \prime$ Symmetry then implies that h is a homeomorphism.

First,consider the case where U does not contain p.Then $h ( U ) = U$ Since U is open in Y and is contained in X,it is open in X. Because X is open in $Y ^ { \prime }$ ,the set $\pmb { U }$ is also open in $\pmb { Y } ^ { \prime }$ as desired.

Second,suppose that U contains p. Since $C = Y - U$ is closed in Y,it is compact asa subspace of Y.Because C is contained in X,it is a compact subspace of X. Then because $\pmb { \chi }$ is a subspace of $Y ^ { \prime }$ ,the space C is also a compact subspace of $\gamma \prime$ Because $\gamma \prime$ is Hausdorff, $c$ is closed in $\gamma \prime$ so that $h ( U ) = Y ^ { \prime } - C$ is open in $\pmb { Y } ^ { \prime }$ ,as desired

Step 2 Now we suppose X is locally compact Hausdorff and construct the space Y. Step l gives us an idea how to proceed. Let us take some object that is not a point of X,denote it by the symbol oo for convenience,and adjoin it to $\pmb { \chi }$ ,forming the set $Y = X \cup \{ \infty \}$ .Topologize Y by defining the collection of open sets of Y to consist of (l)all sets U that are open in X,and (2) all sets of the form $\pmb { Y } - \pmb { C }$ where C is a compact subspace of X.

We need to check that this collction is,in fact, a topology on Y The empty set is a set of type (l),and the space Y is a set of type (2). Checking that the intersection of two open sets is open involves three cases:

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } { U _ { 1 } \cap U _ { 2 } } & { } & { \mathrm { ~ 1 s ~ o f ~ t y p e ~ ( 1 ) . } } \\ { ( Y - C _ { 1 } ) \cap ( Y - C _ { 2 } ) = Y - ( C _ { 1 } \cup C _ { 2 } ) } & { } & { \mathrm { ~ i s ~ o f ~ t y p e ~ ( 2 ) . } } \\ { U _ { 1 } \cap ( Y - C _ { 1 } ) = U _ { 1 } \cap ( X - C _ { 1 } ) } & { } & { \mathrm { ~ i s ~ o f ~ t y p e ~ ( 1 ) , } } \end{array}
$$

because $c _ { 1 }$ is closed in X.Similarly,one checks that the union of any collection of open sets is open.

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \begin{array} { c c } { \bigcup U _ { \alpha } = U } & { \mathrm { i s ~ o f ~ t y p e ~ ( 1 ) . } } \\ { \bigcup ( Y - C _ { \beta } ) = Y - ( \bigcap C _ { \beta } ) = Y - C } & { \mathrm { i s ~ o f ~ t y p e ~ ( 2 ) . } } \\ { ( \bigcup U _ { \alpha } ) \cup ( \bigcup ( Y - C _ { \beta } ) ) = U \cup ( Y - C ) = Y - ( C - U ) , } \end{array} } \end{array}
$$

which is of type (2) because $c - U$ is a closed subspace of C and therefore compact. Now we show that X is a subspace of Y. Given any open set of Y,we show its intersection with X is open in X. If U is of type (l),then $U \cap X = U ; { \mathrm { i f ~ } } Y - C$ is of type (2), then $( Y - C ) \cap X = X - C$ ：both of these sets are open in X. Conversely, any set open in X is a set of type (l) and therefore open in Y by definition.

To show that Y is compact,let A be an open covering of Y.The collection A must contain an open set of type (2),say $\pmb { Y } - \pmb { C }$ ,since none of the open sets of type (l)contain the point oo.Take all the members of A different from $\pmb { Y } - \pmb { C }$ and intersect them with X; they form a collection of open sets of X covering C.Because C is compact, finitely many of them cover C;the corresponding finite collection of elements of A will,along with the element $Y - C$ ,cover all of Y

To show that Yis Hausdorff,let x and y be two points of Y.If both of them lie in X,there are disjoint sets U and V open in X containing them,respectively.On the other hand,if ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$ and $y = \infty$ ，we can choose a compact set C in X containing a neighborhood U of x.Then Uand $\pmb { Y } - \pmb { C }$ are disjoint neighborhoods of x and oo, respectively, in Y.

Step 3.Finally,we prove the converse. Suppose a space Y satisfying conditions $( \mathsf { l } ) \mathsf { - } ( 3 )$ exists.Then X is Hausdorff because it is a subspace of the Hausdorff space Y. Given $x \in X$ ,we show X is locally compact at x Choose disjoint open sets U and V of Y containing x and the single point of $\pmb { Y } - \pmb { X }$ ,respectively Then the set $C = Y - V$ is closed in Y,so it is acompact subspace of Y Since C lies in X,it is also compact as a subspace of X; it contains the neighborhood U of x. ■

If X itself should happen to be compact,then the space Y of the preceding theorem is not very interesting,fol it is obtained from X by adjoining a single isolated point. However, if X is not compact, then the point of $Y - X$ is a limit point of X,so that ${ \bar { x } } = Y$

Definition.If Y is a compact Hausdorff space and X is a proper subspace of Y whose closure equals Y, then Y is said to be acompactification of X. If $\pmb { Y } - \pmb { X }$ equals a single point, then Y is called the one-point compactification of X.

We have shown that X has a one-point compacufication Y if and only if X is a locally compact Hausdorff space that is not itself compact. We speak of $\pmb { \gamma }$ as“the" one-point compactification because Y is uniquely determined up to a homeomorphism.

EXAMPLE 4The one-point compactification of the real line R is homeomorphic with the circle,as you may readily_checkSimilarly,the one-point compactificationof $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is homeomorphic to the sphere $\scriptstyle { \dot { s } } ^ { 2 }$ If $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 }$ is looked at as the space C of complex numbers, then $\mathbb { C } \cup \{ \infty \}$ is called the Riemann sphere,or the exiended complex plane

In some ways our definition of local compactness is not very satisfying.Usually one says that a space X satisfies a given property "locally"if every $x \in X$ has"arbitrarily small"neighborhoods having the given property. Our definition of local compactness has nothing to do with "arbitrarily small" neighborhoods,so there is some question whether we should call it local compactness at all.

Here is another formulation of local compactness,one more truly "local” in nature; it is equivalent to our definition when X is Hausdorff.

Theorem 29.2.Let X bea Hausdorff space Then X is locally compact if and only if given x in X,and givena neighborhoodUof x,there is a neighborhood V of x such that $\bar { \nu }$ is compact and ${ \bar { v } } \subset U$

Proof.Clearly this new formulation implies local compactness; the set $c = \bar { v }$ is the desired compact set containing a neighborhood of x.To prove the converse,suppose X is locally compact,let x be a point of X and let U be a neighborhood of x． Take the one-point compactification Y of X,and let C be the set $Y - U$ Then C is closed in Y,so that C is a compact subspace of Y．Apply Lemma 26 4 to choose disjoint open sets V and W containing x and C,respectively. Then the closure $\bar { v }$ of V in Y is compact,furthermore, $\bar { \nu }$ is disjoint from C,so that ${ \bar { \pmb { v } } } \subset { \pmb { U } }$ ,as desired. ■

Corollary 29.3.Let X be locally compact Hausdorff,let A be a subspace of X If A Is closed in X or open in X,then A is locally compact.

Proof. Suppose that A is closed in X. Given x E A,let C be a compact subspace of X containing the neighborhood U of x in X.Then C ∩ A is closed in C and thus compact,and it contains the neighborhood U ∩ A of x in A.(We have not used the Hausdorff condition here.)

Suppose now that A is open in X.Given $x \in A$ ：we apply the preceding theorem to choose a neighborhood V of x in X such that $\bar { v }$ is compact and ${ \bar { \nu } } \subset { \overline { { A } } }$ Then $c = { \bar { v } }$ is a compact subspace of A containing the neighborhood V of x in A. □

Corollary 29.4.A space X is homeomorphic to an open subspace of a compact Hausdorff space if and only if X is locally compact Hausdorff.

Proof.This follows from Theorem 29 l and Corollary 29.3.

## Exercises

1. Show that the rauonals Qare not locally compact.

2. Let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \}$ be an indexed famuly of nonempty spaces.

(a) Show that if $\Pi X _ { \alpha }$ is locally compact,then each $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is locally compact and $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is compact for all but finitely many values of α.

(b）Prove the converse,assuming the Tychonoff theorem.

3.Let X be a locally compact space.If $f \cdot X \to Y$ is continuous,does it follow that $f ( X )$ is locally compact? What if f is both continuous and open? Justify your answer.

4. Show that $\scriptstyle { \{ 0 , \Pi \} ^ { \omega } }$ is not locally compact in the uniform topology.

5.If $f : X _ { 1 } \to X _ { 2 }$ is a homeomorphism of locally compact Hausdorff spaces, show f extends to a homeomorphusm of their one-point compactifications.

6. Show that the one-point compactification of R is homeomorphic with the circle $s ^ { \mathsf { I } }$

7. Show that the one-point conpactification of $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega }$ 1s homeomorphic with $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$

8.Show that the one-point compactification of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is homeomorphic with the subspace $\{ 0 \} \cup \{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ of R.

9. Show that if G is a locally compact topological group and H is a subgroup,then $G / H$ is locally compact.

10.Show that if X is a Hausdorff space that is locally compact at the point x,then for each neighborhood U of x,there is a neighborhood V of x such that $\bar { v }$ is compact and $\bar { v } \subset U$

\*11. Prove the following:

(a) Lemma. $I f p \cdot x \to Y$ is a quotient map and if Z is a locally compact Hausdorff space,then the map

$$
\pi = p \times i _ { Z } : X \times Z \longrightarrow Y \times Z
$$

is a quotient map.

[Hint: If $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ is open and contains $x \times y .$ choose open sets $U _ { 1 }$ and V with $\bar { v }$ compact, such that $x \times y \in U _ { 1 } \times V$ and $U _ { 1 } \times \bar { V } \subset \pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ . Given $U _ { i } \times \bar { V } \subset \pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ ,use the tube lemma to choose an open set $U _ { i + 1 }$ containing $p ^ { - 1 } ( p ( U _ { i } ) )$ such that $U _ { i + 1 } \times \bar { V } \subset \pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ . Let $U = \bigcup U _ { i }$ ：show that $U \times V$ is a saturated neighborhood of $x \times y$ that is contained in $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( A ) . ]$

An entirely different proof of this result will be outlined in the exercises of \$46.

(b）Theorem.Let $p : A  B$ and q . $c  D$ be quotient maps. If B and C are locally compact Hausdorff spaces, then $p \times q : A \times C \to B \times D$ isa quotient map.