To compare these topologies,we consider the basis B that S generates.The collection B consists of all finite intersections of elements of S.If we intersect elements belonging to the same one of the sets $\ S _ { \beta }$ , we do not get anything new, becau se

$$
\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } ) \cap \pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( V _ { \beta } ) = \pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } \cap V _ { \beta } ) ;
$$

the intersection of two elements of $\ S _ { \beta }$ ,or of finitely many such elements,is again an element of $\mathcal { S } _ { \beta }$ . We get something new only when we intersect elements from different sets $\mathcal { S } _ { \beta }$ . The typical element of the basis B can thus be described as follows: Let $\beta _ { \parallel }$ $\cdots , \beta _ { n }$ be a finite set of distinct indices from the index set J,and let $U _ { \beta _ { l } }$ be an open set in $\pmb { X } _ { \pmb { \beta } _ { i } }$ for $i = 1 , \ldots , n$ .Then

$$
B = \pi _ { \beta _ { 1 } } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta _ { 1 } } ) \cap \pi _ { \beta _ { 2 } } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta _ { 2 } } ) \cap \mathbf { \beta } \cdot \cap \pi _ { \beta _ { n } } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta _ { n } } )
$$

is the typical element of $\mathcal { B }$

Now a point $\{ \mathfrak { x } = \left( x _ { \alpha } \right)$ is in Bif and only if its $\beta _ { 1 }$ th coordinate is in $U _ { \beta _ { 1 } }$ ,its $\beta _ { 2 }$ th coordinate is in $U _ { \beta _ { 2 } }$ ,and so on. There is no restriction whatever on the αth coordinate of x if α is not one of the indices $\beta _ { 1 } , . . , \beta _ { n }$ . As a result, we can write B as the product

$$
B = \prod _ { \alpha \in J } U _ { \alpha } ,
$$

where $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ denotes the entire space $\pmb { X _ { \alpha } }$ if α $\neq \beta _ { 1 } , \ldots , \beta _ { n }$

All this is summarized in the following theorem:

Theorem 19.1 (Comparison of the box and product topologies). The box topology on $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ hasas basisall sets of the form $\Pi U _ { \alpha }$ ，where $U _ { \alpha }$ is open in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for each α.The product topology on $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ hasas basis all sets of the form $\Pi U _ { \alpha }$ ，where $U _ { \alpha }$ is open in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for each α and $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ equals $\pmb { X _ { \alpha } }$ except for finitely many values of α.

Two things are immediately clear First, for finite products $\Pi _ { \alpha = 1 } ^ { n } X _ { \alpha }$ the two topologies are precisely the same. Second,the box topology is in general finer than the product topology.

What is not so clear is why we prefer the product topology to the box topology. The answer will appear as we continue our study of topology. We shall find that a number of important theorems about finite products will also hold for arbitrary products if we use the product topology, but not if we use the box topology. As a result,the product topology is extremely important in mathematics.The box topology is not so important; we shall use it primarly for constructing counterexamples. Therefore,we make the following convention:

Whenever we consider the product $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,we shall assume it is given the product topology unlesswe specifically state otherwise.

Some of the theorems we proved for the product $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ hold for the product $\prod X _ { \alpha }$ no matter which topology we use.We list them here; most of the proofs are left to the exercises.

Theorem 19.2. Suppose the topology on each space $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is given by a basis $\mathcal { B } _ { \alpha }$ .The collection of all sets of the form

$$
\prod _ { \alpha \in J } B _ { \alpha } ,
$$

where $B _ { \alpha } \in \mathcal { B } _ { \alpha }$ for eachα, will serve as a basis for the box topology on $\Pi _ { \alpha \in J } X _ { \alpha }$

The collecton of all sets of the same form,where $B _ { \alpha } \ \in \ { \mathcal { B } } _ { \alpha }$ for finitely many indicesαand $B _ { \alpha } \ = \ X _ { \alpha }$ for all the remaining indices,will serveas a basis for the product topology $\Pi _ { \alpha \in J } X _ { \alpha }$

EXAMPLE1． Consider euclidean n-space $\pmb { \mathbb { R } ^ { n } }$ .A basis for R consists of all open intervals in $\mathbb { R } ;$ hence a basis for the topology of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ consists of all products of the form

$$
( a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ) \times ( a _ { 2 } , b _ { 2 } ) \times \cdot \quad \times ( a _ { n } , b _ { n } ) .
$$

Since $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ is a finite product,the box and product topologies agree Whenever we consider $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ,we will assume that it is given this topology,unless we specifically state otherwise

Theorem 19.3.Let $\pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ be a subspace of $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for each $\textbf { \em a } \in \textbf { \em J }$ Then $\prod A _ { \alpha }$ isa subspace of $\prod X _ { \alpha }$ if both products are given the box topology,or if both products are given the product topology.

Theorem 19.4. If each space $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is a Hausdorff space, then $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is a Hausdorff space in both the box and product topologies.

Theorem 19.5.Let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \}$ bean indexed family of spaces; let $A _ { \alpha } \subset X _ { \alpha }$ for each α. If $\prod X _ { \alpha }$ is given either the product or the box topology,then

$$
\prod { \bar { A } } _ { \alpha } = \overline { { { \prod \ A _ { \alpha } } } } .
$$

Proof. Let $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { \alpha } )$ be a point of $\prod \bar { A } _ { \alpha }$ we show that $\mathbf { x } \in \overline { { \prod A _ { \alpha } } }$ .Let $U = \prod U _ { \alpha }$ be a basis element for either the box or product topology that contains x. Since $\pmb { x _ { \alpha } } \in \bar { A } _ { \alpha }$ we can choose a point $y _ { \alpha } \in U _ { \alpha } \cap A _ { \alpha }$ for each $\pmb { \alpha } .$ Then $\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { y } = ( y _ { \alpha } ) } \end{array}$ belongs to both $\boldsymbol { U }$ and $\prod A _ { \alpha }$ . Since $\pmb { U }$ is arbitrary, it follows that x belongs to the closure of $\prod A _ { \alpha }$

Conversely, suppose $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { \alpha } )$ lies in the closure of $\prod A _ { \alpha }$ ,in either topology.We show that for any given index $\beta ,$ we have $x _ { \beta } \in \bar { A } _ { \beta }$ Let $\nu _ { \beta }$ be an arbitrary open set of $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \beta } }$ containing $x _ { \beta }$ Since $\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( V _ { \beta } )$ is open in $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ in either topology,it contains a point $\mathbf { y } = ( y _ { \mathbf { \alpha } \mathbf { \alpha } } )$ of $\prod A _ { \alpha }$ . Then $y _ { \beta }$ belongs to $V _ { \beta } \cap A _ { \beta }$ .It follows that $\pmb { x _ { \beta } } \in \bar { A } _ { \beta }$

So far,no reason has appeared for preferring the product to the box topology. It is when we try to generalize our previous theorem about continuity of maps into product spaces that a difference first arises. Here is a theorem that does not hold if $\prod X _ { \alpha }$ is given the box topology:

Theorem 19.6. Let $\begin{array} { r } { f : A \to \prod _ { \alpha \in J } X _ { \alpha } } \end{array}$ be given by the equation

$$
f ( a ) = ( f _ { \alpha } ( a ) ) _ { \alpha \epsilon J } ,
$$

where $f _ { \alpha } : A \to X _ { \alpha }$ for each α. Let $\Pi { X } _ { \alpha }$ have the product topology.Then the function f is continuous if and onlyif each function $f _ { \alpha }$ is continuous.

Proof. Let $\pi _ { \beta }$ be the projection of the product onto its $\pmb { \beta }$ th factor.The funcuon $\pi _ { \beta }$ is continuous,for if $U _ { \beta }$ is open in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \beta } }$ ,the set $\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } )$ is a subbasis element for the product topology on $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ Now suppose that $f : A \to \Pi X _ { \alpha }$ is continuous. The function $f _ { \pmb { \beta } }$ equals the composite $\pi _ { \beta } \circ f$ ：being the composite of two continuous functions,it is continuous.

Conversely， suppose that each coordinate function $f _ { \alpha }$ is continuous. To prove that f is continuous,it suffices to prove that the inverse image under f of each subbasis element is open in A,we remarked on this fact when we defined continuous functions. A typical subbasis element for the product topology on $\Pi { X } _ { \alpha }$ is a set of the form $\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } )$ ,where $\pmb { \beta }$ is some index and $U _ { \beta }$ is open in $X _ { \beta }$ .Now

$$
f ^ {  1 } ( \pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } ) ) = f _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } ) ,
$$

because $f _ { \beta } = \pi _ { \beta } \circ f$ Since $f _ { \beta }$ is continuous,this set is open in A,as desired.

Why does this theorem fail if we use the box topology? Probably the rmost convincing thing to do is to look at an example.

EXAMPLE2Consider $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,the countably infinite product of R with itself.Recall that

$$
\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega } = \prod _ { n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } } X _ { n } ,
$$

where $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { n } } = \pmb { \mathbb { R } }$ for each n Let us define a function f $\mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ by the equation

$$
f ( t ) = ( t , t , t , \dots ) ,
$$

the nth coordinate function of f is the function $f _ { n } ( t ) = t$ Each of the coordinate functions $f _ { n } \mathrm { ~ . ~ } \mathbb { R } $ R is continuous; therefore,the function f is continuous if $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is given the product topology.But f is not continuous if $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is given the box topology Consider,for example,the basis element

$$
{ \cal B } = ( - 1 , 1 ) \times ( - \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ) \times ( - \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 1 } { 3 } ) \times \cdot \cdot
$$

for the box topology. We assert that $f ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ is not open in R．If $f ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ were open in R,it would contain some interval $( - \delta , \delta )$ about the point O． This would mean that $f ( ( - \delta , \delta ) ) \subset B$ so that,applying $\pi _ { n }$ to both sides of the inclusion,

$$
f _ { n } ( ( - \delta , \delta ) ) = ( - \delta , \delta ) \subset ( - 1 / n , 1 / n )
$$

for all n,a contradiction

## Exercises

1. Prove Theorem 19.2

2.Prove Theorem 19.3.

3.Prove Theorem 19.4

4. Show that $( X _ { 1 } \times \cdot \cdot \times X _ { n - 1 } ) \times X _ { n }$ is homeomorphic with $X _ { 1 } \times \cdot \cdot \times X _ { n }$

5. One of the implications stated in Theorem 19.6 holds for the box topology. Which one?

6. Let $\mathbf { x } _ { 1 } , \mathbf { x } _ { 2 } , \ldots$ be a sequence of the points of the product space $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ Show that thus sequence converges to the point x if and onlyif the sequence $\pi _ { \alpha } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 } ) , \pi _ { \alpha } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 2 } )$ ， ..converges to $\pi _ { \pmb { \alpha } } ( \pmb { x } )$ for each α. Is this fact true if one uses the box topology instead of the product topology?

7. $\mathbf { \mathbb { L } } e \mathbf { t } \mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ be the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ consisting of all sequences that are "eventually zero," that is,all sequences $( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ such that $x _ { i } \neq 0$ for only finitely many values of i.What is the closure of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the box and product topologies? Justify your answer.

8.Given sequences $( a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ and $( b _ { 1 } , b _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ of real numbers with $a _ { i } ~ > 0$ for all i, define $\pmb { h } : \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }  \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ by the equation

$$
h ( ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots ) ) = ( a _ { 1 } x _ { 1 } + b _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } x _ { 2 } + b _ { 2 } , \ldots ) .
$$

Show that if $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is given the product topology, h is a homeomorphism of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ with itself.What happens if $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ is given the box topology?

9. Show that the choice axiom is equivalent to the statement that for any indexed family $\{ A _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ of nonempty sets,with $J \neq 0$ the cartesian product

$$
\prod _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha }
$$

is not empty.

10.Let A be a set; let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ be an indexed family of spaces;and let $\{ f _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ be an indexed famuly of functions $f _ { \alpha } : A \to X _ { \alpha }$

(a） Show there is a unique coarsest topology $\tau$ on A relative to which each of the functions $f _ { \alpha }$ is continuous.

(b) Let

$$
{ \mathcal { S } } _ { \beta } = \{ f _ { \beta } ^ {  1 } ( U _ { \beta } ) \mid U _ { \beta } { \mathrm { ~ i s ~ o p e n ~ i n ~ } } X _ { \beta } \} ,
$$

and let $\pmb { \mathcal { S } } = \bigcup \mathcal { S } _ { \pmb { \beta } }$ .Show that S is a subbasis for $\mathscr { T }$

(c） Show that a map $g : Y  A$ is continuous relative to $\tau$ if and only if each map $f _ { \alpha } \circ g$ is continuous.

(d） Let $f : A \to \prod X _ { \alpha }$ be defined by the equation

$$
f ( a ) = ( f _ { \alpha } ( a ) ) _ { \alpha \epsilon } \ j ;
$$

let $\mathbf { z }$ denote the subspace $f ( A )$ of the product space $\Pi { X } _ { \alpha }$ . Show that the image under $f$ of each element of $\mathscr { T }$ is an open set of $z$

## \$20 The Metric Topology

One of the most important and frequently used ways of imposing a topology on a set is to define the topology in terms of a metric on the set. Topologies given in this way lie at the heart of modern analysis,for example.In this section,we shall define the metric topology and shall give a number of examples. In the next section,we shall consider some of the properties that metrc topologies satisfy.

Definition. A metric on a set X is a function

$$
d : X \times X \longrightarrow R
$$

having the following properties:

(1) $d ( x , y ) \geq 0$ for all $x , y \in X$ equality holds ifand only if $x = y$

(2) $d ( x , y ) = d ( y , x )$ for all $x , y \in X .$

(3） (Triangle inequality) $d ( x , y ) + d ( y , z ) \geq d ( x , z )$ for all $x , y , z \in X$

Given a metric d on X,the number $d ( x , y )$ is often called the distance between x and y in the metric d Given $\epsilon > 0$ consider the set

$$
B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon ) = \{ y \mid d ( x , y ) < \epsilon \}
$$

of all pointsy whose distance from x is less than ∈. It is called the ∈-bal centered at x. Sometimes we omit the metrc d from the notation and wnte this ball simply as $B ( x , \epsilon )$ , when no confusion will arise.

Definition.If d is a metric on the set X,then the collection of all ∈-balls $B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ ,for ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$ and $\epsilon > 0$ ,isa basis for a topology on X,called the metric topology induced by d.

The first condition for a basis is trivial, since $x \in B ( x , \epsilon )$ for any $\epsilon > 0$ Before checking the second condition for a basis,we show that if y is a point of the basis element $B ( x , \epsilon )$ ,thenthere isabasis element $\pmb { { \cal B } } ( \pmb { y } , \delta )$ centeredat y that is contained in $B ( x , \epsilon )$ .Define& to be the positive number $\epsilon - d ( x , y )$ . Then $B ( y , \delta ) \subset B ( x , \epsilon )$ for if $z \in B ( y , \delta )$ , then $d ( y , z ) < \epsilon - d ( x , y )$ ,from which we conclude that

$$
d ( x , z ) \leq d ( x , y ) + d ( y , z ) < \epsilon .
$$

See Figure 20.1.

Now to check the second condition for a basis,let $\pmb { B } _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { B } _ { 2 }$ be two basis elements and let $y \in B _ { 1 } \cap B _ { 2 }$ .We have just shown that we can choose positive numbers $\delta _ { 1 }$ and $\delta _ { 2 }$ so that $B ( y , \delta _ { 1 } ) \subset B _ { 1 }$ and $B ( y , \delta _ { 2 } ) \subset B _ { 2 }$ .Letting&be the smaller of $\delta _ { 1 }$ and $\delta _ { 2 }$ we conclude that $B ( y , \delta ) \subset B _ { 1 } \cap B _ { 2 }$

Using what we have just proved,we can rephrase the definition of the metric topology as follows:

<!-- image-->  
Figure 20.1

A set U is open in the metric topology induced by d ifand only iffor each $y \in U$ there isa $\delta > 0$ such that $B _ { d } ( y , \delta ) \subset U$

Clearly this condition implies that U is open．Conversely, if U is open, it contains a basis element $B = B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ containing y,and B in turn contains a basis element $B _ { d } ( y , \delta )$ centered at y

EXAMPLE1Given a set X,define

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { d ( x , y ) = 1 } & { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } x \neq y , } \\ { d ( x , y ) = 0 } & { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } x = y } \end{array}
$$

It is trnvial to check that d is a metnc.The topology it induces is the discrete topology; the basis element B(x,l),for exainple,consists of the point x alone.

EXAMPLE 2.The standard metrc on the real numbers R is defined by the equation

$$
d ( x , y ) = | x - y |
$$

It is easy to check that d is a metric.The topology it induces is the same as the order topology: Each basis element (a,b) for the order topology is a basis element for the metric topology,indeed,

$$
( a , b ) = B ( x , \epsilon ) ,
$$

where $\pmb { \lambda } = ( \pmb { a } + \pmb { b } ) / 2$ and $\epsilon = ( b - a ) / 2$ 、And conversely,each ∈-ball $B ( x , \epsilon )$ equals an open interval the interval (x - ∈, x +∈).

Definition.If X is a topological space, X is said to be metrizable if there exists a metnc d on the set X that induces the topology of X. A metric space is a metrizable space X together with a specific metric d that gives the topology of X.

Many of the spaces important for mathematics are metrzable,but some are not. Metrizability is always a highly desirable attribute for a space to possess,for the existence of a metric gives one a valuable tool for proving theorems about the space.

It is,therefore,a problem of fundamental importance in topology to fi nd conditions on a topological space that will guarantee it is metrizable. One of our goals in Chapter 4 will be to find such conditions; they are expressed there in the famous theorem called Urysohn's metrization theorem. Further metrization theorems appear in Chapter 6. In the present section we shall content ourselves with proving merely that R" and $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ are metrizable.

Although the metrizability problem is an important problem in topology, the study of metric spaces as such does not properly belong to topology as much as it does to analysisMetrizability of a space depends only on the topology of the space in question,but properties that involve a specific metric for X in general do not. For instance,one can make the following definition in a metric space.

Definition.Let X be a metric space with metric d. A subset A of X is said to be bounded if there is some number M such that

$$
d ( a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } ) \leq M
$$

for every pair ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 } , { \pmb a } _ { 2 }$ of points of A. If A is bounded and nonempty, the diameter of A is defined to be the number

$$
\dim A = \operatorname* { s u p } \{ d ( a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } ) \mid a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } \in A \} .
$$

Boundedness of a set is not a topological property,for it depends on the particular metric d that is used for X.For instance,if X is a metric space with metric $^ { d , }$ then there exists a metric $\bar { \pmb { d } }$ that gives the topology of X,relative to which every subset of X is bounded. It is defined as follows'

Theorem 20.1. Let X be a metric space with metric d. Define $\bar { d } : X \times X \to \mathbb { R }$ by the equation

$$
\bar { d } ( x , y ) = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ d ( x , y ) , 1 \}
$$

Then $\bar { \pmb { d } }$ is a metric that induces the same topology as $\pmb { d }$

The metric $\bar { \pmb { d } }$ is called the standard bounded metric corresponding to d.

Proof.Checking the first two conditions for a metric is trivial． Let us check the triangle inequality:

$$
\bar { d } ( x , z ) \leq \bar { d } ( x , y ) + \bar { d } ( y , z ) .
$$

Now if either $d ( x , y ) \geq 1$ or $d ( y , z ) \geq 1$ ,then the rght side of this inequality is at least l,since the left side is (by definition) at most l,the inequality holds.It remains to consider the case in which $d ( x , y ) < 1$ and $d ( y , z ) < 1$ . In this case,we have

$$
d ( x , z ) \leq d ( x , y ) + d ( y , z ) = \bar { d } ( x , y ) + \bar { d } ( y , z ) .
$$

Since $\bar { d } ( x , z ) \leq d ( x , z )$ by definition,the triangle inequality holds for $\bar { \pmb d } .$

Now we note that in any metric space,the collection of ∈-balls with $\epsilon < 1$ forms a basis for the metric topology,for every basis element containing x contains such an ∈-ball centered at x. It follows that d and $\bar { \pmb { d } }$ induce the same topology on $\pmb { \chi }$ because the collections of ∈-balls with $\epsilon < 1$ under these two metrics are the same collection.

Now we consider some familiar spaces and show they are metrizable.

Definition. Given $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } )$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ , we define the norm of x by the equation

$$
\| x \| = ( x _ { 1 } ^ { 2 } + \cdot \cdot \cdot + x _ { n } ^ { 2 } ) ^ { 1 / 2 } ;
$$

and we define the euclidean metric d on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ by the equat1on

$$
d ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \| \mathbf { x } - \mathbf { y } \| = [ ( x _ { 1 } - y _ { 1 } ) ^ { 2 } + \cdot \cdot \cdot + ( x _ { n } - y _ { n } ) ^ { 2 } ] ^ { 1 / 2 } .
$$

We define the square metric $\rho$ by the equation

$$
\rho ( \mathbf x , \mathbf y ) = \operatorname* { m a x } \{ | x _ { 1 } - y _ { 1 } | , \dots , | x _ { n } - y _ { n } | \} .
$$

The proof that d is a metrc requires some work; it is probably already familiar to you. If not,a proof is outlined in the exercises. We shallseldom have occasion to use this metrc on ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { n }$

To show that $\rho$ is a metric is easier. Only the trangle inequality is nontrvial. From the triangle inequality for R it follows that for each positive integer i,

$$
| x _ { i } - z _ { i } | \leq | x _ { i } - y _ { i } | + | y _ { i } - z _ { i } | .
$$

Then by definition of $\rho$

$$
| x _ { i } - z _ { i } | \leq \rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) + \rho ( \mathbf { y } , \mathbf { z } ) .
$$

As a result

$$
\rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { z } ) = \operatorname* { m a x } \{ | . \mathbf { r } _ { i } - z _ { i } | \} \leq \rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) + \rho ( \mathbf { y } , \mathbf { z } ) ,
$$

as desired.

On the real line $\mathbb { R } = \mathbb { R } ^ { 1 }$ ，these two metrics coincide with the standard metric for R. In the plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,the basis elements under d can be pictured as circular regions, while the basis elements under $\rho$ can be pictured as square regions.

We now show that each of these metrics induces the usual topology on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ We need the following lemma:

Lemma 20.2. Letd and $\pmb { d } ^ { \prime }$ be two metncs on the set $\pmb { \chi }$ ; let $\mathcal { T }$ and $\scriptstyle { \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ be the topologies they induce,respectively.Then $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime }$ is finer than $\mathscr { T }$ if and only if for each xin X and each $\epsilon > 0$ there exists a $\delta > 0$ such that

$$
B _ { d ^ { \prime } } ( x , \delta ) \subset B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )
$$

Proof.Suppose that ${ \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ is finer than $\mathcal { T }$ Given the basis element $B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ for $\mathcal { T }$ ,there 1s by Lemma l3.3 a basis element $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ for the topology ${ \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ such that $x \in B ^ { \prime } \subset B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ Within $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ we can find a ball $B _ { d ^ { \prime } } ( x , \delta )$ centered at x.

Conversely, suppose the ${ \pmb \delta } { \pmb \cdot } { \pmb \epsilon }$ condition holds Given a basis element B for $\mathcal { T }$ containing x,we can find within Ba ball $B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ centered at x.By the given condition, there is aδsuch that $B _ { d ^ { \prime } } ( x , \delta ) \subset B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ . Then Lemma 13.3 applies to show ${ \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ is finer than $\mathcal { T }$

Theorem 20.3. The topologies on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ induced by the euclidean metric d and the square metric $\rho$ are the same as the product topology on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$

Proof. Let $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { 1 } , \quad . , x _ { n } )$ and $\mathbf { y } = ( y _ { 1 } , \dots , y _ { n } )$ be two points of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ . It is simple algebra to check that

$$
\rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) \leq d ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) \leq { \sqrt { n } } \rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } )
$$

The first inequality shows that

$$
B _ { d } ( { \mathbf { x } } , \epsilon ) \subset B _ { \rho } ( { \mathbf { x } } , \epsilon )
$$

for all x and $\epsilon$ since if $d ( { \bf x } , { \bf y } ) \ < \ \epsilon $ ， then $\rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) \ < \ \epsilon$ also.Similarly,the second inequality shows that

$$
B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon / \sqrt { n } ) \subset B _ { d } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )
$$

for all x and $\epsilon$ . It follows from the preceding lemma that the two metric topologies are the same.

Now we show that the product topology is the same as that given by the metrnc $\pmb { \rho }$ First, let

$$
B = ( a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ) \times \textrm { \cdot } \times ( a _ { n } , b _ { n } )
$$

be a basis element for the product topology,and let $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } )$ be ari element of B.For each i,there is an $\epsilon _ { i }$ such that

$$
( x _ { i } - \epsilon _ { i } , x _ { i } + \epsilon _ { i } ) \subset ( a _ { i } , b _ { i } ) ,
$$

choose $\epsilon = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ \epsilon _ { 1 } , \dots , \epsilon _ { n } \}$ Then $B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon ) \subset B$ ,as you can readily check．As a result,the p-topology is finer than theproduct topology.

Conversely, let $B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ be a basis element for the p-topology. Given the element $\mathbf { y } \in B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ ,we need to find a basis element B for the product topology such that

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { y } \in B \subset B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon ) . } \end{array}
$$

But this is trivial,for

$$
B _ { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon ) = ( x _ { 1 } - \epsilon , x _ { 1 } + \epsilon ) \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times ( x _ { n } - \epsilon , x _ { n } + \epsilon )
$$

is itself a basis element for the product topology.

Now we consider the infinite cartesian product $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ . It is natural to try to generalize the metrics d and $\pmb { \rho }$ to this space.For instance,one can attempt to define a metric d on $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ by the equation

$$
d ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \left[ \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { \infty } ( x _ { i } - y _ { i } ) ^ { 2 } \right] ^ { 1 / 2 } .
$$

But this equation does not always make sense, for the series in question need not converge.(This equation does define a metric on a certain important subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ however; see the exercises.)

Similarly,one can atempt to generalze the square metric $\pmb { \rho }$ 0 $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ by defining

$$
\rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \operatorname* { s u p } \{ | x _ { n } - y _ { n } | \} .
$$

Again, this formula does not always make sense. If however we replace the usual metric $d ( x , y ) = | x - y |$ on R by its bounded counterpart $\bar { d } ( x , y ) = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ | x - y | , 1 \}$ then this definition does make sense; it gives a metric on $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ called the uniform metric.

The uniform metric can be defined more generally on the cartesian product $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ for arbitrary J,as follows:

Definition. Given an index set J,and given points $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { \alpha } ) _ { \alpha \in J }$ and $\mathbf { y } = ( y _ { \alpha } ) _ { \alpha \in J }$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ ,let us define a metric $\bar { \pmb \rho }$ on $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ by the equation

$$
\bar { \rho } ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \operatorname* { s u p } \{ \bar { d } ( x _ { \alpha } , y _ { \alpha } ) \mid \alpha \in J \} ,
$$

where $\bar { \pmb { d } }$ is the standard bounded metric on $\pmb { \mathbb { R } } .$ ，It is easy to check that $\bar { \rho }$ is indeed a metric; it is called the uniform metric on $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ ,and the topology it induces is called the uniform topology.

The relation between this topology and the product and box topologies is the following:

Theorem 20.4. The uniform topology on $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ is finer than the product topology and coarser than the box topology; these three topologiesare all different if Jis infinite.

Proof.Suppose that we are given a point $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { \alpha } ) _ { \alpha \in J }$ and a product topology basis element $\Pi U _ { \alpha }$ about x. Let $\alpha _ { 1 } , \ldots , \alpha _ { n }$ be the indices for which $U _ { \alpha } \neq \mathbb { R }$ Then for eachi,choose $\epsilon _ { i } > 0$ so that the $\epsilon _ { i }$ -ball centered at $\pmb { x _ { \alpha _ { i } } }$ in the $\bar { \pmb { d } }$ metric is contained in $U _ { \alpha _ { i } }$ ; this we can do because $U _ { \alpha _ { \iota } }$ is open in $\mathbb { R } .$ Let $\epsilon = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ \epsilon _ { 1 } , \dots , \epsilon _ { n } \}$ ; then the ∈-ball centered at x in the $\bar { \rho }$ metric is contained in $\Pi U _ { \alpha }$ . For if z is a point of $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ such that $\bar { \rho } ( { \pmb x } , { \pmb x } ) < \epsilon$ ，then $\bar { d } ( x _ { \alpha } , z _ { \alpha } ) < \epsilon$ for all ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ,$ so that $\pmb { \tau } \in \Pi U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ .It follows that the uniform topology is finer than the product topology.

On the other hand, let B be the ∈-ball centered at x in the $\bar { \rho }$ metric. Then the box neighborhood

$$
U = \prod ( x _ { \alpha } - { \textstyle \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \epsilon , x _ { \alpha } + { \textstyle \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \epsilon )
$$

of x is contained in B. For if $\pmb { y } \in U$ , then $\bar { d } ( x _ { \alpha } , y _ { \alpha } ) < { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \epsilon$ for all α, so that $\bar { \pmb { \rho } } ( \{ \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } \} ) \leq$ $\frac { 1 } { 2 } \epsilon$

Showing these three topologies are different if J is infinite is a task we leave to the exercises.

In the case where J is infinite,we stillhave not determined whether $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ is metrizable in either the box or the product topology. It turns out that the only one of these cases where $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ is metrizable is the case where J is countable and $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ has the product topology. As we shall see.

Theorem 20.5. Let $\bar { d } ( a , b ) = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ | a - b | , 1 \}$ be the standard bounded me tric on R. If xand y are two points of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,define

$$
D ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \mathbf { s u p } \left\{ { \frac { { \bar { d } } ( x _ { i } , y _ { i } ) } { i } } \right\} .
$$

Then D is a metric that induces the product topology on $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$

Proof.The properties of a metric are satisfied trivially except for the tangle inequality, which is proved by noting that for alli,

$$
\frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { i } , z _ { i } ) } { i } \leq \frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { i } , y _ { i } ) } { i } + \frac { \bar { d } ( y _ { i } , z _ { i } ) } { i } \leq D ( { \bf x } , { \bf y } ) + D ( { \bf y } , { \bf z } ) ,
$$

so that

$$
\operatorname* { s u p } \left\{ \frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { i } , z _ { i } ) } { i } \right\} \leq D ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) + D ( \mathbf { y } , \mathbf { z } ) .
$$

The fact that D gives the product topology requires a litle more work.First, let U be open in the metric topology and let ${ \pmb x } \in U$ ：we'find an open set V in the product topology such that $\mathbf { x } \in V \subset U$ Choose an e-ball $B _ { D } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ lying in U.Then choose N large enough that $1 / N < \epsilon$ .Finally,let V be the basis element for the product topology

$$
V = ( x _ { 1 } - \epsilon , x _ { 1 } + \epsilon ) \times \cdots \times ( x _ { N } - \epsilon , x _ { N } + \epsilon ) \times \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \times \cdots .
$$

We assert that $V \subset B _ { D } ( { \bf x } , \epsilon )$ : Given any y in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$

$$
\frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { i } , y _ { i } ) } { i } \leq \frac 1 N ~ \mathrm { f o r } ~ i \geq N .
$$

Therefore,

$$
D ( \mathbf x , \mathbf y ) \le \operatorname* { m a x } \left\{ \frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } ) } { 1 } , \cdots \cdot \frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { N } , y _ { N } ) } { N } , \frac 1 N \right\} .
$$

If y is in V,this expression is less than ∈,so that $V \subset B _ { D } ( { \bf x } , \epsilon )$ ,as desired.

Conversely,consider a basis element

$$
U = \prod _ { i \in \pmb { L } _ { + } } U _ { i }
$$

for the product topology, where $U _ { i }$ is open in R for $\mathbf { i } = \alpha _ { 1 } , \ldots , \alpha _ { n }$ and $U _ { i } = \mathbb { R }$ for all other indices i. Given ${ \pmb x } \in U$ ,we find an open set V of the metric topology such that $\mathbf { x } \in V \subset U$ .Choose an interval $( x _ { i } - \epsilon _ { i } , x _ { i } + \epsilon _ { i } )$ in R centered about $x _ { i }$ and lying in $U _ { i }$ for $\mathbf { i } = \alpha _ { 1 } , \ldots , \alpha _ { n }$ ：chooseeach $\epsilon _ { \iota } \leq 1$ . Then define

$$
\epsilon = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ \epsilon _ { i } / \mathrm { ~ i ~ } | \mathrm { ~ i ~ } = \alpha _ { 1 } , . . . , \alpha _ { n } \} .
$$

We assert that

$$
{ \mathbf x } \in B _ { D } ( { \mathbf x } , \epsilon ) \subset U .
$$

Let y be a point of $B _ { D } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ . Then for all i,

$$
\frac { \bar { d } ( x _ { i } , y _ { i } ) } { i } \leq D ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) < \epsilon .
$$

Now if $i = \alpha _ { 1 } , . . , \alpha _ { n }$ , then $\epsilon \leq \epsilon _ { i } / { \ i }$ ， so that $\bar { d } ( x _ { i } , y _ { i } ) \ < \ \epsilon _ { i } \ \leq \ 1$ ; it follows that $| x _ { i } - y _ { i } | < \epsilon _ { i }$ . Therefore, $\mathbf { y } \in \Pi U _ { \iota }$ ,as desired.

## Exercises

1. (a) In $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ ,define

$$
d ^ { \prime } ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = | x _ { 1 } - y _ { 1 } | _ { , } + \mathbf { \delta } \cdot \mathbf { \cdot } + | x _ { n } - y _ { n } | .
$$

Show that $d ^ { \prime }$ is a metric that induces the usual topology of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ . Sketch the basis elements under $d ^ { \prime }$ when $\pmb { n = 2 }$

(b）More generally, given $p \geq 1$ ,define

$$
d ^ { \prime } ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \left[ \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } | x _ { i } - y _ { i } | ^ { p } \right] ^ { 1 / p }
$$

for x, $\mathbf { y } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ Assume that $d ^ { \prime }$ is a metric. Show that it induces the usual topology on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$

2. Show that $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ in the dictionary order topology is metrizable.

3. Let X be a metric space with metric d.

(a) Show that d $: X \times X \to \mathbb { R }$ is continuous.

(b) Let $\pmb { \chi \prime }$ denote a space having the same underlying set as X.Show that if $d : X ^ { \prime } \times X ^ { \prime } \to \mathbb { R }$ is continuous,then the topology of $\pmb { X } ^ { \prime }$ is finer than the topology of X.

Onecan summarize the result of this exercise as follows: If X has a metric d. then the topology induced by d is the coarsest topology relative to which the function d is continuous.

4. Consider the product, uniform,and box topologies on $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$

(a） In which topologies are the following functions from R to $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ continuous?

$$
\begin{array} { l } { f ( t ) = ( t , 2 t , 3 t , \dots ) , } \\ { g ( t ) = ( t , t , t , \dots ) , } \\ { h ( t ) = ( t , \frac { 1 } { 2 } t , \frac { 1 } { 3 } t , \dots ~ . ) . } \end{array}
$$

(b） In which topologies do the following sequences converge?

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \mathbf w _ { 1 } = ( 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , \dots ) , \quad \mathbf x _ { 1 } = ( 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , \dots ) , } \\ & { \mathbf w _ { 2 } = ( 0 , 2 , 2 , 2 , \dots ) , \quad \mathbf x _ { 2 } = ( 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \dots ) , } \\ & { \mathbf w _ { 3 } = ( 0 , 0 , 3 , 3 , \dots ) , \quad \mathbf x _ { 3 } = ( 0 , 0 , \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 1 } { 3 } \dots ) , } \\ & { \quad \dots } \\ & { \mathbf y _ { 1 } = ( 1 , 0 , 0 , 0 , \dots ) , \quad \mathbf z _ { 1 } = ( 1 , 1 , 0 , 0 , \dots ) , } \\ & { \mathbf y _ { 2 } = ( \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 0 , 0 , \dots ) , \quad \mathbf z _ { 2 } = ( \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 0 , 0 , \dots ) , } \\ & { \mathbf y _ { 3 } = ( \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 1 } { 3 } , 0 , \dots ) , \quad \mathbf z _ { 3 } = ( \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 1 } { 3 } , 0 , 0 , \dots ) , } \\ & { \quad \dots . } \end{array}
$$

5. Let $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ be the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ consisting of alsequences that are eventually zero. What is the closure of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the uniform topology? Justify your answer.

6. Let $\bar { \rho }$ be the uniform metric on $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ Given $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots ) \in \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ and given 0 $< \epsilon < 1$ ,let

$$
U ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon ) = ( x _ { 1 } - \epsilon , x _ { 1 } + \epsilon ) \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times ( x _ { n } - \epsilon , x _ { n } + \epsilon ) \times \cdot \cdot \cdot .
$$

(a） Show that $U ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ is not equal to the -ball $B _ { \bar { \rho } } ( { \bf x } , \epsilon )$

(b） Show that $U ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon )$ is not even open in the uniform topology.

(c） Show that

$$
B _ { \bar { \rho } } ( \mathbf { x } , \epsilon ) = \bigcup _ { \delta < \epsilon } U ( \mathbf { x } , \delta ) .
$$

7. Consider the map $h : \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }  \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ defined in Exercise8 of 19.give $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ the uniform topology. Under what conditions on the numbers ${ \pmb { a } } _ { i }$ and $b _ { i }$ is h continuous? a homeomorphism?

8.Let X be the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ consisting of all sequences x such that $\sum x _ { t } ^ { 2 }$ converges. Then the formula

$$
d ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \left[ \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { \infty } ( x _ { i } - y _ { i } ) ^ { 2 } \right] ^ { 1 / 2 }
$$

defines a metric on X. (See Exercise l0.) On X we have the three topologies it inherits from the box,uniform,and product topologies on ${ \pmb R } ^ { \omega }$ .We have also the topology given by the metric $d ,$ which we call the $\bar { \ell ^ { 2 } } _ { - t o p o l o g y }$ (Read "little ell two.")

(a） Show that on X,we have the inclusions

box topologyDe²-topologyuniform topology.

(b) The set $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ of all sequences that are eventually zero is contained in X. Show that the four topologies that $\mathbb { R } ^ { \infty }$ inherits as a subspace of X are all distinct.

(c） The set

$$
H = \prod _ { n \in \mathbf { Z } _ { + } } \left\{ 0 , 1 / n \right\}
$$

is contained in X,it is called the Hilbert cube.Compare the four topologies that H inherits as a subspace of X.

9. Show that the euclidean metric d on $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ is a metric,as follows: $\operatorname { I f } \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ and $c \in \mathbb { R }$ define

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { \bf x + y = ( x _ { 1 } + y _ { 1 } , \dots , x _ { n } + y _ { n } ) , } } \\ { { \quad \quad c { \bf x } = ( c x _ { 1 } , \dots , c x _ { n } ) , } } \\ { { \quad \bf x \cdot y = x _ { 1 } y _ { 1 } + \cdot \nabla \cdot + x _ { n } y _ { n } } } \end{array}
$$

(a) Show that ${ \bf x } \cdot ( { \bf y } + { \bf z } ) = ( { \bf x } \mathrm {  ~ \bf ~ y } ) + ( { \bf x } \cdot { \bf z } )$

(b） Show that $| \mathbf { x } \cdot \mathbf { y } | \leq \| \mathbf { x } \| \| \mathbf { y } \| . \left[ H i n t ; \operatorname { I f } \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } \neq 0 \right.$ let $a = 1 / \| \mathbf { x } \| \operatorname { a n d } b = 1 / \| \mathbf { y } \|$ and use the fact that $\| a \mathbf { x } \pm b \mathbf { y } \| \ge \mathbf { 0 } . \}$

(c） Show that $\| \mathbf { x } + \mathbf { y } \| \leq \| \mathbf { x } \| + \| \mathbf { y } \|$ [Hint: Compute $( { \bf x } + { \bf y } ) \cdot ( { \bf x } + { \bf y } )$ and apply (b).]

(d) Verify that d is a metric.

10.Let X denote the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ consisting of all sequences $( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots )$ such that $\sum x _ { i } ^ { 2 }$ converges.(You may assume the standard facts about infinite series. In case they are not familiar to you,we shall give them in Exercise ll of the next section.)

(a) Show that if $\mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } \in X$ ,then $\sum | x _ { i } y _ { i } |$ converges.[Hint: Use (b) of Exercise 9 to show that the partial sums are bounded.]

(b) Let $c \in \mathbb { R }$ Show that if $\mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } \in X$ ,then so are $\mathbf x + \mathbf y$ and cx.

(c） Show that

$$
d ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \left[ \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { \infty } ( x _ { i } - y _ { i } ) ^ { 2 } \right] ^ { 1 / 2 }
$$

is a well-defined metric on $\pmb { \chi } .$

\*11. Show that if d is a metric for $\pmb { \chi }$ then

$$
d ^ { \prime } ( x , y ) = d ( x , y ) / ( 1 + d ( x , y ) )
$$

is a bounded metric that gives the topology of X.[Hint: If $f ( x ) = x / ( 1 + x )$ for $x > 0$ ,use the mean-value theorem to show that $f ( a + b ) - f ( b ) \leq f ( a ) . . \mathrm { { } }$

## \$21 The Metric Topology (continued)

In this section,we discuss the relation of the metric topology to the concepts we have previously introduced.

Subspaces of metric spaces behave the way one would wish them to; if A is a subspace of the topological space X and d is a metric for X,then the restriction of $^ { d }$ to $A \times A$ is a metric for the topology of A. This we leave to you to check.

About order topologies there is nothing to be said; some are metrizable (for instance, $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ and R),and others are not,as we shall see

The Hausdorff axiom is satisfied by every metric topology.If x and yare distinct points of the metric space $( X , d )$ ，we let $\epsilon = { \textstyle \frac { 1 } { 2 } } d ( x , y )$ ； then the triangle inequality implies that $B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ and $B _ { d } ( y , \epsilon )$ are disjoint.

The product topology we have already considered in special cases;we have proved that the products $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ and $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ are metrizable.It is true in general that countable products of metrizable spaces are metrizable;the proof follows a pattern simular to the proof for $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,so we leave it to the exercises.

About continuous functions there is a good deal to be said. Consideration of this topic will occupy the remainder of the section.

When we study continuous functions on metric spaces,we are about as close to the study of calculus and analysis as we shall come in thus book. There are two things we want to do at this point.

First,we want to show that the familiar $\because - \epsilon - \delta$ definition" of continuity carres over to general metric spaces,and so does the “convergent sequence definition"of continuity.

Second,we want to consider two additional methods for constructing continuous functions,besides those discussed in \$18. One is the process of taking surms,differences,products,and quotients of continuous real-valued functions. The other is the process of taking limits of uniformly convergent sequences of continuous functions.

Theorem 21.1. Let $f : X \to Y ,$ ：letXandYbemetrizablewith metrics $\pmb { d } _ { \pmb { X } }$ and $d \gamma$ respectively.Then continuity of f is equivalent to the requirement that given $x \in X$ and given $\epsilon > 0$ ,thereexists $\delta > 0$ such that

$$
d _ { X } ( x , y ) < \delta \Longrightarrow d _ { Y } ( f ( x ) , f ( y ) ) < \epsilon .
$$

Proof.Suppose that $f$ is continuous. Given x and $\epsilon ,$ consider the set

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( B ( f ( x ) , \epsilon ) ) ,
$$

which is open in X and contains the point x.It contains some δ-ball $B ( x , \delta )$ centered at x.Ify is in this &-ball, then $f ( y )$ is in the ∈-ball centered at $f ( x )$ ,as desired.

Conversely,suppose that the ∈-δ condition is satisfied. Let V be open in Y；we show that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in X.Let x be a point of the set $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ . Since $f ( x ) \in$ V,there is an ∈-ball $B ( f ( x ) , \epsilon )$ centered at $f ( x )$ and contained in V. By the ∈- δ condition,there is a δ-ball $\pmb { { \cal B } } ( \pmb { x } , \delta )$ centered at x such that $f ( B ( x , \delta ) ) \subset B ( f ( x ) , \epsilon )$ Then $\pmb { { \cal B } } ( \pmb { x } , \delta )$ is a neighborhood of x contained in $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ ,so that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open, as desired. ■

Now we turn to the convergent sequence definition of continuity. We begin by considering the relation between convergent sequences and closures of sets. It is certainly believable,from one's experience in analysis,that if x lies in the closure of a subset A of the space X,then there should exist a sequence of points of A converging to x.This is not true in general,but it is true for metrizable spaces.

Lemma 21.2 (The sequence lemma). Let X be a topological space; let $A \subset X$ .If there is a sequence of points of A converging to x,then $x \in { \bar { A } }$ ; the converse holds if X is metrizable.

Proof.Suppose that $x _ { n }  x$ ，where $x _ { n } ~ \in ~ A$ .Then every neighborhood U of x contains a point of A,so $x \in { \bar { A } }$ by Theorem l7.5.Conversely,suppose that X is metrizable and $x \in { \bar { A } }$ ．Letd be a metric for the topology of X.For each positive integern,take the neighborhood $B _ { d } ( x , 1 / n )$ of radius $1 / n$ of x,and choose $x _ { n }$ to be a point of its intersection with A.We assert that the sequence $x _ { n }$ converges to x: Any open set U containing x contains an ∈-ball $B _ { d } ( x , \epsilon )$ centered at x; if we choose N so that $1 / N < \epsilon$ ,then U contains $x _ { i }$ for all $i \geq N$ ■

Theorem 21.3. Let $f : X \to Y$ . If the function f is continuous,then for every convergent sequence $x _ { n } \to x$ in X,the sequence $f ( x _ { n } )$ converges to $f ( x )$ . The converse holds ifX is metrizable.

Proof.Assume that f is continuous.Given $x _ { n } \to x$ ,we wish to show that $f ( x _ { n } ) $ $f ( x )$ .Let V be a neighborhood of $f ( x )$ .Then $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is a neighborhood of x,and so there is an N such that $x _ { n } \in f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ for $\pmb { n } \geq N$ Then $f ( x _ { n } ) \in V$ for $\pmb { n } \geq N$

To prove the converse,assume that the convergent sequence condition is satisfied. Let A be a subset of X;we show that $f ( { \overline { { A } } } ) \subset { \overline { { f ( A ) } } }$ If $\textbf {  { x } } \in ~ \bar { A }$ ,then there is a sequence ${ \pmb x } _ { \pmb n }$ of points of A converging to x (by the preceding lemma). By assumption, the sequence $f ( x _ { n } )$ converges to $f ( x )$ . Since $f ( x _ { n } ) \in f ( A )$ ,thepreceding lemma implies that $f ( x ) \in { \overline { { f ( A ) } } }$ .(Note that metrizability of Y is not needed.) Hence $f ( { \bar { A } } ) \subset$ $\overline { { f ( A ) } }$ ,as desired. □

Incidentally,in proving Lemma 21.2 and Theorem 21 3 we did not uSe the full strength of the hypothesis that the space X is metrizable.Ail we really needed was the countable collection $B _ { d } ( x , 1 / n )$ of balls about x.This fact leads us to make a new definition

A space X is said to have a countable basis at the point x if there is a countable collection $\{ U _ { n } \} _ { n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } }$ of neighborhoods of x such that any neighborhood U of x contains at least one of the sets $U _ { n }$ . A space X that has a countable basis at each of ts points is said to satisfy the first countability axiom.

If X has a countable basis $\{ U _ { \eta } \}$ at x,then the proof of Lemma 21 2 goes through,one simply replaces the ball $B _ { d } ( x , 1 / n )$ throughout by the set

$$
B _ { n } = U _ { 1 } \cap U _ { 2 } \cap \cdot \ \cdot \ \cdot \cap \ U _ { n } .
$$

The proof of Theorem 21 3 goes through unchanged

A metrizable space aiways satisfies the first countability axiom,but the converse is not true,as we shallsee. Like the Hausdorff axiom,the first countability axiom is a requirement that we sometimes impose on a topological space in order to prove stronger theorems about the space.We shall study it in more detail in Chapter 4

Now we consider additional methods for constructing continuous functions. We need the following lemma:

Lemma 21.4.The addition,subtraction,and multiplication operations are continuous functions from $\mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ into R;and the quotient operation is a continuous function from $\mathbb { R } \times ( \mathbb { R } - \{ 0 \} )$ into R.

You have probably seen this lemma proved before; it is a standard "ε-δ argument." If not,a proof is outlined in Exercise l2 below; you should have no trouble filing in the details.

Theorem 21.5.If X is a topological space,and if $f , g : X \to \mathbb { R }$ are continuous functions, then $f + g , f - g$ g,and $_ f \cdot g$ are continuous. $I f g ( x ) \neq 0$ for all x, then $f / g$ is continuous.

Proof. The map $h : X \to \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }$ defined by

$$
h ( x ) = f ( x ) \times g ( x )
$$

is continuous,by Theorem l8.4. The function $f + g$ equals the composite of h and the addition operation

$$
+ : \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R } ;
$$

therefore $f + g$ is continuous. Similar arguments apply to $f - g , f \cdot g$ ,and $f / g$

Finally, we come to the notion of uniform convergence.

Definition.Let $f _ { n } : X \to Y$ be a sequence of functions from the set X to the metric space Y.Let d be the metric for Y. We say that the sequence $( f _ { n } )$ converges uniformly to the function $f : X \to Y$ if given $\epsilon > 0$ ,there exists an integer N such that

$$
d ( f _ { n } ( x ) , f ( x ) ) < \epsilon
$$

for all $\pmb { n } > N$ and all x in X.

Uniformity of convergence depends not only on the topology of Y but also on its metric. We have the following theorem about uniformly convergent sequences:

Theorem 21.6 (Uniform limit theorem). Let $f _ { n } : X \to Y$ be a sequence of continuous functions from the topological space X to the metric space Y. $H ( f _ { n } )$ converges uniformly to $f$ then $f$ is continuous.

Proof.Let V be open in Y; let xo be a point of $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ .We wish to find a neighborhood $\boldsymbol { U }$ of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ such that $f ( U ) \subset V$

Let $y _ { 0 } = f ( x _ { 0 } )$ .First choose ∈ so that the ε-ball $B ( y _ { 0 } , \epsilon )$ is contained in V.Then, using uniform convergence,choose N so that for all $\pmb { n } \geq N$ and all $x \in X$

$$
d ( f _ { n } ( x ) , f ( x ) ) < \epsilon / 3 .
$$

Finally,using continuity of $f _ { N }$ ,choose a neighborhood U of $\scriptstyle { \pmb { x } } _ { 0 }$ such that $f _ { N }$ carries $\boldsymbol { U }$ into the $\epsilon / 3$ ball in Y centered at $f _ { N } ( x _ { 0 } )$

We claim that f carries $\pmb { U }$ into $B ( y _ { 0 } , \epsilon )$ and hence into V,as desired. For this purpose,note that if ${ \pmb x } \in U$ ,then

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { d ( f ( x ) , f _ { N } ( x ) ) < \epsilon / 3 ~ } & { ( \mathrm { b y ~ c h o i c e ~ o f ~ } N ) , } \\ { d ( f _ { N } ( x ) , f _ { N } ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 ~ } & { ( \mathrm { b y ~ c h o i c e ~ o f ~ } U ) , } \\ { d ( f _ { N } ( x _ { 0 } ) , f ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon / 3 ~ } & { ( \mathrm { b y ~ c h o i c e ~ o f ~ } N ) . } \end{array}
$$

Adding and using the triangle inequality.we see that $d ( f ( x ) , f ( x _ { 0 } ) ) \ < \ \epsilon$ ，as desired. ■

Let us remark that the notion of uniform convergence is related to the definition of the uniform metric,which we gave in the preceding section. Consider,for example, the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { x }$ of all functions $f : X \to \mathbb { R }$ ,in the uniform metric $\bar { \pmb \rho }$ It is not difficult to see that a sequence of functions $f _ { n } : X \to \mathbb { R }$ converges uniformly to $f$ if and only if the sequence $( f _ { n } )$ converges to $f$ when they are considered as elements of the metric space $( \mathbb { R } ^ { X } , \bar { \rho } )$ .We leave the proof to the exercises.

We conclude the section with some examples of spaces that are not metrizable.

EXAMPLE I $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the box topology is not metrizable.

We shall show that the sequence lemma does not hold for $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ .Let A be the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ consisting of those points all of whose coordinates are positive:

$$
A = \{ ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots ) \mid x _ { i } > 0 { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ a l l ~ } } i \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} .
$$

Let O be the“orngin"in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,that is, the point $( 0 , 0 , \quad . )$ each of whose coordinates is zero. In the box topology,O belongs to $\bar { A } ;$ for if

$$
B = ( a _ { 1 } , b _ { 1 } ) \times ( a _ { 2 } , b _ { 2 } ) \times \cdot
$$

is any basis element containing O,then B intersects A.For instance,the point

$$
( \frac { 1 } { 2 } b _ { 1 } , \frac { 1 } { 2 } b _ { 2 } \cdots )
$$

belongs to $\pmb { { \cal B } } \cap \pmb { { \cal A } } .$

But we assert that there is no sequence of points of A converging to O.For let $( \mathbf { a } _ { n } )$ be a sequence of points of A,where

$$
{ \bf a } _ { n } = ( x _ { 1 n } , x _ { 2 n } , . . . , x _ { i n } , . . . ) .
$$

Every coordinate $x _ { 1 n }$ is positive,so we can construct a basis element $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ for the box topology on R by setting

$$
B ^ { \prime } = ( - x _ { 1 1 } , x _ { 1 1 } ) \times ( - x _ { 2 2 } , x _ { 2 2 } ) \times \cdot \quad .
$$

Then $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ contains the orgin O,but it contains no member of the sequence $( \mathfrak { a } _ { n } )$ ；the point ${ \pmb a } _ { n }$ cannot belong to $\pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ because its nth coordinate $x _ { n n }$ does not belong to the interval $( - x _ { n n } , x _ { n n } )$ . Hence the sequence $( \mathsf { a } _ { n } )$ cannot converge to O in the box topology.

EXAMPLE 2.An uncouniable product of R with itself is not metrizable.

Let Jbe an uncountable index set; we show that $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ does not satisfy the sequence lemma (in the product topology)

Let A be the subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ consisting of all points $( x _ { \alpha } )$ such that $x _ { \alpha } = 1$ for all but finitely many valuesofα Let Obe the“origin"in $\mathbf { \dot { R } ^ { J } }$ ,the point each of whose coordinates is 0.

We assert that O belongs to the closure of A Let $\Pi U _ { { \pmb { \alpha } } }$ be a basis element containing 0. Then $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } } \neq \mathbb { R }$ for only finitely many values of α,say for ${ \pmb { \alpha } } = { \pmb { \alpha } } _ { 1 } , \quad \ldots { \pmb { \alpha } } _ { n }$ . Let $( \pmb { x _ { \alpha } } )$ be the point of A defined by letting $\pmb { x _ { \alpha } = 0 }$ for $\alpha = \alpha _ { 1 } , \ldots , \alpha _ { n }$ and $x _ { \alpha } = 1$ for all other values of α,then $( x _ { \alpha } ) \in A \cap \prod U _ { \alpha }$ ,as desired.

But there is no sequence of points of A converging to 0.For let ${ \pmb a } _ { \pmb n }$ be a sequence of points of A. Given n,let $J _ { n }$ denote the subset of Jconsisting of those indices α for which the αth coordinate of ${ \mathfrak { a } } _ { n }$ is different from l．The union of all the sets $J _ { n }$ isa countable union of finite sets and therefore countable.Because J itself is uncountable,there is an index in J,say $\beta$ ,that does not lie in any of the sets $J _ { n }$ .Thismeans that for each of the points ${ \pmb a } _ { \pmb n }$ ,its βth coordinate equals 1.

Now let $U _ { \beta }$ be the open interval (-l,1) in R,and let U be the open set $\pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } )$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ .The set U is a neighborhood of O that contains none of the points ${ \mathfrak { a } } _ { n }$ therefore,the sequence ${ \mathfrak { a } } _ { n }$ cannot converge to 0.

## Exercises

1. Let $A \subset X$ .If d is a metrc for the topology of X,show that $d | A \times A$ is a metric for the subspace topology on A.

2.Let X and Y be metric spaces with metrics $d _ { X }$ and $d _ { Y }$ ，respectively.Let $f$ $X  Y$ have the property that for every pair of points $x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 }$ of X,

$$
d _ { Y } ( f ( x _ { 1 } ) , f ( x _ { 2 } ) ) = d _ { X } ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } ) .
$$

Show that f is an imbedding. It is called an isometric imbedding of X in Y.

3. Let $X _ { n }$ be a metric space with metric $d _ { n }$ ,for $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

(a） Show that

$$
\rho ( x , y ) = \operatorname* { m a x } \{ d _ { 1 } ( x _ { 1 } , y _ { 1 } ) , . . . , d _ { n } ( x _ { n } , y _ { n } ) \}
$$

is a metric for the product space $X _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times X _ { n }$

(b)Let $\bar { d } _ { i } = \operatorname* { m n } \{ d _ { i } , 1 \}$ . Show that

$$
D ( x , y ) = \mathsf { s u p } \{ \bar { d } _ { i } ( x _ { i } , y _ { i } ) / i \}
$$

is a metric for the product space $\prod X _ { t }$

4. Show that $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ and the ordered square satisfy the first countability axiom. (This result does not,of course,imply that they are metrizable.)

5. Theorem. Let $x _ { n } \to x$ and $y _ { n }  y$ in the space $\pmb { \mathbb { R } }$ Then

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { x _ { n } + y _ { n } \to x + y , } } \\ { { x _ { n } - y _ { n } \to x - y , } } \\ { { x _ { n } y _ { n } \to x y , } } \end{array}
$$

and provided that each $y _ { n } \neq 0$ and $y \neq 0$

$$
x _ { n } / y _ { n } \to x / y .
$$

{Hint: Apply Lemma 21.4; recall from the exercises of \$19 that if $x _ { n } \to x$ and $y _ { n }  y$ then $x _ { n } \times y _ { n } \to x \times y . ]$

6. Define $f _ { n } \mathrm { ~ . ~ } [ 0 , 1 ]  \mathbb { R }$ by the equation $f _ { n } ( x ) = x ^ { n }$ . Show that the sequence $( f _ { n } ( x ) )$ converges for each $x \in \{ 0 , 1 \}$ ,but that the sequence $( f _ { n } )$ does not converge uniformly.

7. Let X be a set,and let $f _ { n } : X \to \mathbb { R }$ be a sequence of functions. Let $\bar { \pmb \rho }$ be the uniform metric on the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { x }$ . Show that the sequence $( f _ { n } )$ converges uniformly to the function $f : X \to \mathbb { R }$ if and only if the sequence $( f _ { n } )$ converges to fas elements of the metric space $( \mathbb { R } ^ { X } , \bar { \rho } )$

8.Let X be a topological space and let Y be a metric space. Let $f _ { n } : X \to Y$ be a sequence of continuous functions. Let $x _ { n }$ be a sequence of points of X converging to x. Show that if the sequence $( f _ { n } )$ converges uniformly to $f$ then $( f _ { n } ( x _ { n } ) )$ converges to $f ( x )$

9. Let $f _ { n } : \mathbb { R } \to$ R be the function

$$
f _ { n } ( x ) = \frac { 1 } { n ^ { 3 } [ x - ( 1 / n ) ] ^ { 2 } + 1 } .
$$

See Figure 21.1. Let $f : \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ be the zero function.

(a） Show that $f _ { n } ( x ) \to f ( x )$ for each ${ \pmb x } \in \mathbb { R } .$

(b) Show that $f _ { n }$ does not converge uniformly to $f .$ (This shows that the converse of Theorem 21.6 does not hold; the limit function f may be continuous even though the convergence is not uniform.)

10. Using the closed set formulation of continuity (Theorem 18.1),show that the following are closed subsets of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

$$
A = \{ x \times y \mid x y = 1 \} ,
$$

$$
S ^ { 1 } = \{ x \times y \mid x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } = 1 \} ,
$$

$$
B ^ { 2 } = \{ x \times y \mid x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } \leq 1 \} .
$$