<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Theorem 17.3.Let Y bea subspace of X. If A is closed in Y and Y is closed in X, then A is closed in X.

## Closure and Interior of a Set

Givena subset A of a topological space X,the interior of A is defined as the union of all open sets contained in A,and the closure of A is defined as the intersec tion of all closed sets containing A.

The interior of A is denoted by Int A and the closure of A is denoted by Cl A or by A.Obviously Int A is an open set and $\pmb { \hat { A } }$ is a closed set; furthermore,

$$
\operatorname { I n t } A \subset A \subset { \bar { A } } .
$$

If A is open, A = Int A; while if A is closed, $\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { A } = \pmb { \hat { A } } . } \end{array}$

We shall not make much use of the interior of a set,but the closure of a set will be quite important.

When dealing with a topological space X and a subspace Y,one needs to exercise care in taking closures of sets If A is a subset of Y,the closure of A in Y and the closure of A in X will in general be different In such a situation,we reserve the notation $\bar { A }$ to stand fortheclosure of Ain X.The closure of AinY canbe expressed in terms of $\bar { A }$ ,as the following theorem shows:

Theorem 17.4. Let Y be a subspace of X,let A be a subset of Y,let $\bar { A }$ denote the closure of A in X.Then the closure of A in Y equals $\bar { A } \cap \gamma$

Proof. Let B denote the closure of_ A in Y. The set $\bar { A }$ is closed in X, so $\bar { A } \cap \gamma$ is closed in Y by Theorem l7.2.Since $\bar { A } \cap \gamma$ contains A,and since by definitiori B equals the intersection of all closed subsets of Y containing A,we must have $B \subset ( \bar { A } \cap Y )$

On the other hand,we know that B is closed in Y．Hence by Theorem 17.2, $B = C \cap Y$ for some set C closed in X. Then C is a closed set of X containing A; because $\bar { A }$ is the intersection of all such closed sets,we conclude that $\bar { A } \subset C$ .Then $( \bar { A } \cap Y ) \subset ( C \cap Y ) = B$ ■

The definition of the closure of a set does not give us a convenient way for actually finding the closures of specific sets,since the collection of all closed sets in X,like the collection of all open sets,is usually much too big to work with. Another way of descnbing the closure of a set,useful because it involves only a basis for the topology of X,is given in the following theorem.

First let us introduce some convenient terminology. We shall say that a set A intersects a set B if the intersection A N B is not empty.

Theorem 17.5. Let A be a subset of the topological space X.

(a） Then $x \in { \bar { A } }$ if and only if every open set U containing x intersects A.

(b）Supposing the topology of X is given by a basis,then $x \in { \bar { A } }$ if and only if every basis element B containing x intersects A.

Proof.Consider the statement in (a). I is a statement of the form $P \ \Leftrightarrow \ Q$ Let us transform each implication to its contrapositive,thereby obtaining the logically equivalent statement (not $P ) \Leftrightarrow$ (not Q). Wntten out, it is the following.

$x \notin \bar { A } \Longleftrightarrow$ there exisis an open set U containing x that does not intersect A.

In this form,our iheorem is easy to prove. If x is not in $\bar { A } ,$ ihe set $U = X - { \bar { A } }$ is an open set containing x that does not intersect A,as desired Conversely, if there exists an open set U containing x which does not intersect A,then $X - U$ is a closed set containing A By definition of the closure $\bar { A }$ the set $\pmb { X } - \pmb { U }$ must contain $\bar { A }$ therefore, x cannot be in $\bar { A }$

Statement (b) follows readily lf every open set containing x intersects A,so does every basis element B containing x, because B is an open set. Conversely, if every basis element containing x intersects A,so does every open set $\pmb { U }$ containing x, because U contains a basis element that contains x. □

Mathematicians often use some special terminology here.They shorten the statement“U is an open set containing $\pmb { x } "$ to the phrase

## $\because U$ is a neighborhood of $\pmb { x } \because$

Using this ierminology,one can write the first half of ihe preceding theoremas follows:

If A is a subset of the topological space X, then $\pmb { x } \in \bar { A }$ if and only if every neighborhood of x intersects A.

EXAMPLE6Lel X be ihe real line R.If $A = ( 0 , 1 ]$ ihen $\bar { A } \ = \ [ 0 , 1 ]$ for every neighborhood of Ointersects A, while every point outside [O.i] has a neighborhood disjoint from A Similar arguments apply io the following subsets of X

If $B = \{ \ln \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ ihen B ={OUB If $C = \{ 0 \} \cup \{ 1 , 2 \}$ ,1hen $\bar { C } = \{ 0 \} \cup [ 1 , 2 ]$ If Q is ihe set of rational numbers,then $\dot { \mathbb { Q } } = \mathbb { R }$ If $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is the set of positive iniegers,then $\bar { \mathbb { Z } } _ { + } = \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ . If $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ is the sel of positive reals,then ihe closure of $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ is ihe sel $\mathbb { R } _ { + } \cup \{ 0 \}$ (This is the reason we introduced ihe notation $\hat { { \mathbb R } } _ { + }$ for the sel $\mathbb { R } _ { + } \cup \{ 0 \}$ ,back in \$2)

ExAMPLE7Consider the subspace $\pmb { Y } = ( 0 , 1 ]$ of the real line R. The set $A = ( 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } )$ is a subset of Y, its closure in Ris the set [O.],and its closure in Yis the set $[ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ] \cap \check { Y } =$ $\{ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } \}$

Some mathematicians use the term "neighborhood’ differently. They say that A is a neighborhood of x if A merely contains an open set containing x.We shall not follow this practice.

## Limit Points

There is yet another way of describing the closure of a set,a way that involves the important concept of limit point,which we consider now.

If A is a subset of the topological space X and if x is a point of X,we say that x is a limit point (or "cluster point,"or "point of accumulaton") of A if every neighborhood of x intersects A in some point other than x itself.Said differently,x is a limit point of A if it belongs to the closure of $A - \{ x \}$ The point x may lie in A or not; for this definition it does not matter.

EXAMPLE8 Consider the real line R.If $A = ( 0 , 1 ]$ ,then the point Ois a limit point of A and so is the point $\frac { 1 } { 2 }$ In fact,every point of the interval [O,1] is a limit point of A,but no other point of R is a limit point of A

If $B = \{ \ln \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ ,then O is the only limit point of B.Every other point x of R has a neighborhood that either does not intersect B at all,or it intersects Bonly in the point x itself. If $C = \{ 0 \} \cup ( 1 , 2 )$ ,then the lmit points of C aie the points of the interval[i,2].If Qis the set of rational numbers,every point of R is a limit point of Q.If $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ is the set of positive integers, no point of R is a limit point of Z+ If $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$ is the set of positive reals,then every point of $\{ 0 \} \cup \tilde { \mathbb { R } } _ { + }$ is a limit point of $\mathbb { R } _ { + }$

Comparison of Examples 6 and 8 suggests a relationship between the closure of a set and the limut points of a set. That relationshup is given in the following theorem:

Theorem 17.6. Let A be a subset of the topological space X, let $\pmb { A } ^ { \prime }$ be the set of all limit points of A. Then

$$
{ \bar { A } } = A \cup A ^ { \prime } .
$$

ProofIf x is in $\pmb { A } ^ { \prime }$ ,every neighborhood of.x intersects A (in a point different from x). Therefore,by Theorem 17.5,x belongs to $\bar { A }$ Hence $A ^ { \prime } \subset { \bar { A } }$ Since by definition $A \subset { \bar { A } }$ ,it follows that $A \cup A ^ { \prime } \subset \bar { A }$

To demonstrate the reverse inclusion,we let x be a point of $\bar { A }$ and show that $x \in A \cup A ^ { \prime }$ If xhappens to lie in A,it is trivial that $x \in A \cup A ^ { \prime } ;$ suppose that x does not lie in A. Since $\pmb { x } \in \bar { A }$ ,we know that every neighborhood U of x intersects A; because $x \notin A$ the set $\pmb { U }$ must intersect A in a point different from x.Then $x \in A ^ { \prime } .$ so that $\pmb { x } \in A \cup A ^ { \prime }$ asdesired. □

Corollary 17.7.A subset of a topological space is closed if and only if it contains all its limit points.

ProofThe set A is closed if and only if $\pmb { A } = \bar { \pmb { A } }$ ,and the latter holds if and only if $A ^ { \prime } \subset A$

## Hausdorff Spaces

One's experience with open and closed sets and limit points in the real line and the plane can be misleading when one considers more general topological spaces.For example,in the spaces R and $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,each one-point set {xol is closed.This fact is easily proved; every point different from $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ hasa neighborhood not intersecting {xo},so that $\{ x _ { 0 } \}$ is its own closure.But this fact is not true for arbitrary topological spaces. Consider the topology on the three-point set {a,b,c} indicated in Figure I7.3.In this space,the one-point set {b) is not closed,for its complement is not open.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 17.3

Similarly, one's experience with the properties of convergent sequences in R and $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ can be misleading when one deals with more general topological spaces. In an arbitrary topological space,one says that a sequence $x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } , \ldots$ of points of the space X converges to the point x of X provided that,corresponding to each neighborhood U of x,there is a positive integer N such that $x _ { n } \in U$ for all $n \geq N$ In R and $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,a sequence cannot converge to more than one point,but in an arbitrary space,it can. In the space indicated in Figure I7.3,for example,the sequence defined by setting $\scriptstyle x _ { n } = b$ for all n converges not only to the point b,but also to the point a and to the point c!

Topologies in which one-point sets are not closed,or in which sequences can converge to more than one point,are considered by many mathematicians to be somewhat strange.They are not really very interesting,for they seldom occur in other branches of mathematics And the theorems that one can prove about topological spaces are rather limited if such examples are allowed. Therefore,one often imposes an additional condition that will rule out examples like this one,bringing the class of spaces under consideration closer to those to which one's geometric intuition applies. The condition was suggested by the mathematician Felix Hausdorff,so mathematicians have come to call it by hus name.

Definition.A topological space X iscalled a Hausdorffspace if for each pair $x _ { 1 }$ ,x2 ofdistinctpointsofXthereexistneighboroods $U _ { 1 }$ ,and $U _ { 2 }$ $x _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { x } _ { 2 }$ respectively, that are disjoint.

## Theorem 17.8.Every finite point set in a Hausdorff space X is closed.

Proof.It suffices to show that every one-point set $\{ x _ { 0 } \}$ is closed.If x is a point of X different from $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ ，then x and $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ have disjoint neighborhoods U and V,respectively. Since U does not intersect $\{ x _ { 0 } \}$ ,the point x cannot belong to the closure of the set {xo). As a result, the closure of the set {xo) is $\{ x _ { 0 } \}$ itself,so that it is closed.

The condition ihat finite point sets be closed is in fact weaker than the Hausdorff condition For example,the real line R in the finite complement topology is not a Hausdorff space,but it is a space in which finite point sets are closed The condition that finite point sets be closed has been given a name of its own: it is called the $\pmb { T _ { 1 } }$ axiom.(We shall explain the reason for this strange terminology in Chapter 4.） The $T _ { 1 }$ axiom will appear in this book in a few exercises,and in just one theorem,which is the following:

Theorem 17.9. Let X be a space satisfying the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom;let A be a subset of X. Then the point xis a limit point of A if and only if every neighborhoodof x contains infinitely many points of A.

Proof.If every neighborhood of x intersects A in infinitely many points,it certainly intersects A in some point other than x itself,so that x is a limit point of A

Conversely，suppose that x is a limit point of A,and suppose some neighborhood U of x intersects A in only finitely many points.Then U also intersects $A - \{ x \}$ in finitely many points； let $\{ x _ { 1 } , ~ , x _ { m } \}$ be the points of $U \cap ( A - \{ x \} )$ . The set $X - \{ x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { m } \}$ is an open set of X,since the finite point set $\{ x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { m } \}$ is closed; then

$$
U \cap ( X - \{ x _ { 1 } , . . . , x _ { m } \} )
$$

is a neighborhood of x that intersects the set $A - \{ x \}$ not at all. This contradicts the assumption that x is a limit point of A. □

One reason for our lack of interest in the $T _ { \mathrm { l } }$ axiom is the fact that many of the interesting theorems of iopology require not just that axiom,but the full strength of the Hausdorff axiom. Furthermore,most of the spaces that are important to mathematicians are Hausdorff spaces.The following two iheorems give some substance to these remarks.

Theorem 17.1o. If X is a Hausdorf space,then a sequence of points of X converges to at most one point of X

ProofSuppose that $x _ { n }$ is a sequence of points of X that converges to xIf $y \neq x$ let U and V be disjoint neighborhoods of x and y,respectively. Since U contains $x _ { n }$ for all but finitely many values of n,the set V cannot Therefore, ${ \pmb x } _ { \pmb n }$ cannot converge to y.

If the sequence $x _ { n }$ of points of the Hausdorff space X converges to the point x of X,we often write $x _ { n } \to x$ ,and we say that x is the limit of the sequence ${ \pmb x } _ { \pmb n }$

The proof of the following result is left to the exercises.

Theorem 17.11. Every simply ordered set is a Hausdorf space in the order topology. The product of two Hausdorff spaces is a Hausdorff space. A subspace of a Hausdorff space is a Hausdorff space.

The Hausdorff condition is generally considered to be a very mild extra condition to impose on a topological space. Indeed, in a first course in topology some mathematicians go so far as to impose this condition at the outset,refusing to consider spaces that are not Hausdorff spaces.We shall not go this far,but we shall certainly assume the Hausdorff condition whenever it is needed in a proof without having any qualms about limiting seriously the range of applications of the results.

The Hausdorff condition is one of a number of extra conditions one can impose on a topological space. Each time one imposes such a conditon,one can prove stronger theorems, but one limits the class of spaces to which the theorems apply. Much of the research that has been done in topology since its beginnings has centered on the problem of finding conditions that will be strong enough to enable one to prove interesting theorems about spaces satisfying those condiuons,and yet not so strong that they limit severely the range of applications of the results.

We shal study a number of such conditions in the next two chapters. The Hausdorff condition and the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom are but two of a collection of conditions similar to one another that are calld collectively the separation axioms. Other conditions include the Countability axioms,and various compactness and connectedness conditions. Some of these are quite stringent requirements,as you will see.

## Exercises

1. Let C be a collection of subsets of the set X. Suppose that  and X are in C, and that finite unions and arbitrary intersections of elements of C are in C. Show that the collection

$$
\mathcal { T } = \{ X - C \mid C \in \mathcal { C } \}
$$

is a topology on X.

2.Show that if A is closed in Y and Y is closed in X,then A is closed in X.

3. Show that if A is closed in X and B is closed in Y,then A × B is closed in $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \cal T }$

4. Show that if U is open in X and A is closedin X,then U - A is open in Xand $A - U$ is closed in X.

5.Let X be an ordered set in the order topology. Show that ${ \overline { { ( a , b ) } } } \subset \{ a , b \} $ Under what conditions does equality hold?

6. Let A, B, and $A _ { \alpha }$ denote subsets of a space X. Prove the following.

(a）1f $A \subset B .$ then ${ \bar { A } } \subset { \bar { B } }$

(b) $\overline { { A \cup B } } = \overline { { A } } \cup \bar { B }$

(c) $\overline { { \bigcup A _ { \alpha } } } \supset \bigcup \bar { A } _ { \alpha }$ ；give an example where equality fails.

7.Criticize the following "proof"that ${ \overline { { \bigcup A _ { \alpha } } } } \subset \bigcup \bar { A } _ { \alpha } \colon \mathrm { i f } \{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is a collection of sets in X and if $\pmb { x } \in \overline { { \bigcup { A _ { \alpha } } } }$ ,then every neighborhood U of x intersects $\bigcup A _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ · Thus U must intersect some $A _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,so that x must belong to the closure of some $A _ { \alpha }$ Therefore, $\pmb { \chi } \in \bigcup \bar { A } _ { \alpha }$

8. Let A, B,and $A _ { \alpha }$ denote subsets of a space X. Determine whether the following equations hold; if an equality fails,determine whether one of the inclusions D or C holds.

(a) $\overline { { A \cap B } } = \bar { A } \cap \bar { B }$

(b) $\widetilde { \bigcap A _ { \alpha } } = \bigcap \bar { A } _ { \alpha } .$

(c) $\overline { { A - B } } = \overline { { A } } - \overline { { B } } .$

9. Let $A \subset X$ and $B \subset Y$ . Show that in the space $X \times Y$

$$
\overline { { { A \times B } } } = \bar { A } \times \bar { B } ,
$$

10. Show that every order topology is Hausdorff.

11. Show that the product of two Hausdorf spaces is Hausdorff.

12.Show that a subspace of a Hausdorff space is Hausdorff.

13. Show that X is Hausdorffif and only if the diagonal $\Delta = \{ x \times x \mid x \in X \}$ is closed in $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \chi }$

14.In the finite complement topology on R,to what point or points does the sequence $x _ { n } = 1 / n$ converge?

15. Show the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom is equivalent to the condition that for each pair of points of X, each has a neighborhood not containing the other.

16. Consider the five topologies on R given in Exercise 7 of \$13.

(a)Determine the closure of the set $K = \{ 1 / n \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \}$ under each of these topologies.

(b） Which of these topologies satisfy the Hausdorff axiom? the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom?

17.Consider the lower limit topology on R and the topology given by the basis C of Exercise 8 of \$13.Determine the closures of the intervals $A = ( 0 , { \sqrt { 2 } } )$ and $\pmb { { \cal B } } = ( \sqrt { 2 } , 3 )$ in these two topologies.

18.Determine the closures of the following subsets of the ordered square:

$$
A = \{ ( 1 / n ) \times 0 \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} ,
$$

$$
B = \{ ( 1 - 1 / n ) \times \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \mid n \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + } \} ,
$$

$$
C = \{ x \times 0 \mid 0 < x < 1 \} ,
$$

$$
D = \{ x \times { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \mid 0 < x < 1 \} ,
$$

$$
E = \{ \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } \times y \mid 0 < y < 1 \} .
$$

19. If $A \subset X .$ ,we define the boundary of A by the equation

$$
\ B \mathbf { d } \ A = \bar { A } \cap ( \overline { { X - A ) } } .
$$

(a) Show that Int A and Bd A are disjoint,and $\bar { A } =$ Int A U Bd A.

(b) Show that Bd $A = \emptyset \Leftrightarrow A$ is both open and closed.

(c） Show that U is open Bd ${ \cal { U } } = \bar { \cal { U } } - { \cal { U } }$

(d) If U is open,is it true that $U = { \mathrm { I n t } } ( { \bar { U } } ) ?$ Justfy your ans wer.

20.Find the boundary and the interior of each of the following subsets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

(a) $A = \{ x \times y \mid y = 0 \}$

(b) $B = \{ x \times y \mid x > 0 { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } y \neq 0 \}$

(c) $C = A \cup B$

(d) $D = \{ x \times y \mid x { \mathrm { ~ i s ~ r a t i o n a l } } \}$

(e) $E = \{ x \times y \mid 0 < x ^ { 2 } - y ^ { 2 } \leq 1 \}$

( $F = \{ x \times y \mid x \neq 0 { \mathrm { a n d } } y \leq 1 / x \}$

\*21.(Kuratowski) Consider the collection of all subsets A of the topological space X. The operations of closure $A  { \bar { A } }$ and complementation $A \to X - A$ are functions from this collection to itself.

(a） Show that starting with a given set A,one can form no more than l4 distinct sets by applying these two operations successively.

(b)Find a subset A of R (in its usual topology) for which the maximum of 14 is obtained

## \$18 Continuous Functions

The concept of continuous function is basic to much of mathematics.Continuous functions on the real line appear in the first pages of any calculus book,and continuous functions in the plane and in space follow not far behind.More general kinds of conunuous functions arise as one goes further in mathematics.In this section,we shall formulate a definition of continuity that will include all these as special cases,and we shall study various properties of continuous functions. Many of these properties are direct generalizations of things you learned about continuous functions in calculus and analysis.

## Continuity of a Function

Let X and Y be topological spaces.A function $f : X \to Y$ is said to be continuous if for each open subset V of Y,the set $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is an open subset of X.

Recall that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is the set of all points x of X for which $f ( x ) \in V$ it is empty if V does not intersect the image set $f ( X )$ of f.

Conunuity of a function depends not only upon the function f itself,but also on the topologies specified for its domain and range.If we wish to emphasize this fact, we can say that f is continuous relative to specific topologies on X and Y.

Let us note that if the topology of the range space Y is given by a basis B, then to prove continuity of f it sufices to show that the inverse image of every basis element is open.The arbitrary open set V of Y can be written as a union of basis elements

$$
V = \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } B _ { \alpha } .
$$

Then

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } f ^ { - 1 } ( B _ { \alpha } ) ,
$$

so that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open if each set $f ^ { - 1 } ( B _ { \alpha } )$ is open.

If the topology on Y is given by a subbasis S,to prove continuity of f it will even suffice to show that the inverse image of each subbasis element is open. The arbitrary basis element B for Y can be written as a finite intersection $s _ { 1 } \cap \ldots \cap s _ { n }$ of subbasis elements; it follows from the equation

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( B ) = f ^ { - 1 } ( S _ { 1 } ) \cap \cdots \cap f ^ { - 1 } ( S _ { n } )
$$

that the inverse image of every basis element is open.

EXAMPLE 1Let us consider a function like those studied in analysis,a “real-valued function of a real variable,”

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { f } & { { } \mathbb { R } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R } . } \end{array}
$$

In analysis,one defines continuity of f via the“e-& definition."a bugaboo over the years for every student of mathematics. As one would expect,the ∈-δ definition and ours are equivalent To prove that our definition implies the e-δ definition,for instance,we proceed as follows\*

Given xo in R,and given $\epsilon > 0 ,$ the interval $V = ( f ( x _ { 0 } ) - \epsilon , f ( x _ { 0 } ) + \epsilon )$ is an open set of the range space R Therefore, $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is an open set in the domain space R.Because $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ contains the point xo,it contains some basis element (a,b) about xo We choose δ to be the smaller of the two numbers ${ \pmb x } _ { 0 } - { \pmb a }$ and $b - x _ { 0 }$ Then if $| x - x _ { 0 } | < \delta$ ,the point x must be in $( a , b )$ , so that $f ( x ) \in V ,$ and $| f ( x ) - f ( x _ { 0 } ) | < \epsilon$ ,as desired.

Proving that the ∈-δ definition implies our definition is no harder; we leave it to you. We shall return to this example when we study metric spaces

EXAMPLE 2.In calculus one considers the property of continuity for many kinds of functions.For example,one studies functions of the foliowing types:

f .R → R²(curves in the plane)

$\boldsymbol { f } \cdot \mathbb { R } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ (curves in space)

$f \ \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R }$ (functions $f ( x , y )$ of two real varables)

$f \cdot \mathbb { R } ^ { 3 } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R }$ (functions $f ( x , y , z )$ of three real variables)

$f \cdot \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ (vector fields $\pmb { v } ( \pmb { x } , \pmb { y } )$ in the plane).

Each of them has a notion of continuity defined for it. Our general definition of continuity includes all these as special cases,this fact will be a consequence of general theorems we shall prove concerning continuous functions on product spaces and on metric spaces.

EXA MPLE 3Let R denote the set of real numbers in its usual topology,and let $\scriptstyle { \mathbb { R } } _ { t }$ denote the same set in the lower limit topology.Let

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \boldsymbol { f } } & { { } \mathbb { R } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R } \boldsymbol { \ell } } \end{array}
$$

be the identity function. $f ( x ) = x$ for every real number x．Then f is not a continuous function,the inverse image of the open set {a,b) of $\scriptstyle { \mathbb { R } } _ { t }$ equals itself, which is not open in R. On the other hand,the identity function

$$
g \cdot \mathbb { R } _ { \ell } \longrightarrow \mathbb { R }
$$

is continuous,because the inverse image of (a,b) is itself, which is open in $\scriptstyle \mathbb { R } _ { t }$

Inanalysis,one studies several different but equivalent ways of formulating the definition of continuity. Some of these generalize to arbitrary spaces,and they are considered in the theorems that follow. The familiar “ε-δ”definition and the "convergent sequence definition"do not generalize to arbitrary spaces; they will be treated when we study metric spaces.

Theorem 18.1. Let X and Y be topological spaces; let $f : X \to Y$ Then the following are equivalent:

(1）f is continuous.

(2)For every subset A of X,one has $f ( { \bar { A } } ) \subset { \overline { { f ( A ) } } }$

(3） For every closed set B of Y,the set $f ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ is closed in X

(4) For each $x \in X$ and each neighborhood V of $f ( x )$ ,there is a neighborhood U of x such that $f ( U ) \subset V$

If the condition in (4) holds for the point x of X,we say that f is continuous at the point x.

Proof.We show that $( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 2 ) \Rightarrow ( 3 ) \Rightarrow ( 1 )$ and that $( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 4 ) \Rightarrow ( 1 )$

$( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 2 )$ . Assume that f is continuous.Let A be a subset of X.We show that if $\pmb { x } \in \bar { \pmb { A } }$ A,then $f ( x ) \in { \overline { { f ( A ) } } }$ .Let V be a neighborhood of $f ( x )$ . Then $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is an open set of X containing x: it must intersect A in some point y.Then V intersects $f ( A )$ in the point $f ( \mathbf { y } )$ ,so that $f ( x ) \in { \overline { { f ( A ) } } }$ ,asdesired.

$\left( 2 \right) \Rightarrow \left( 3 \right)$ .Let B be closed in Y and let $\pmb { A } = f ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { B } )$ . We wish to prove that A is closed in X;we show that $\bar { A } = A$ ．By elementary set theory,we have $f ( A ) =$ $f ( f ^ { - 1 } ( B ) ) \subset B$ .Therefore,if $\pmb { x } \in \bar { A }$

$$
f ( x ) \in f ( { \bar { A } } ) \subset { \overline { { f ( A ) } } } \subset { \bar { B } } = B ,
$$

so that $x \in f ^ { - 1 } ( B ) = A$ . Thus $\bar { A } \subset A$ so that $\bar { A } = A$ as desired.

$( 3 ) \Rightarrow ( 1 )$ .Let V be an open set of Y. Set $\pmb { { \cal B } } = \pmb { { \cal Y } } - \pmb { { \cal V } }$ .Then

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( B ) = f ^ { - 1 } ( Y ) - f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = X - f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) .
$$

Now B is aclosed set of Y.Then $f ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ is closed in Xby hypothesis,so that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is open in X,as desired.

$( 1 ) \Rightarrow ( 4 )$ .Let $\textbf { \textit { x } } \in \textbf { \textit { X } }$ and let V be a neighborhood of $f ( x )$ . Then the set $U = f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is a neighborhood of x such that $f ( U ) \subset V$

$( 4 ) \Rightarrow \left( \mathbb { I } \right)$ .Let V be an open set of Y; let x be a point of $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ Then $f ( \tau ) \in V$ so that by hypothesis there is a neighborhood $U _ { x }$ of x such that $f ( U _ { \tau } ) \subset \nu$ . Then $U _ { x } \subset f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ . It follows that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ can be written as the union of the operi sets $U _ { x }$ so that it is open.

## Homeomorphisms

Let X and Y be topological spaces; let $f \cdot X \to Y$ be a bijection. If both the function f and the inverse functon

$$
f ^ { - 1 } : Y \to X
$$

are continuous,then f is called a homeomorphism.

The condition that $f ^ { - 1 }$ be continuous says that for each open set U of X,the inverse image of U under the map $f ^ { - 1 } : Y \to X$ is open in Y But the inverse image of U under the map $f ^ { - 1 }$ is the same as the image of U under the map $f .$ See Figure I8.I. So another way to define a homeomorphism is to say that it is a bijective correspondence $f : X \to Y$ such that $f ( U )$ is open if and only if U is open.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 18.1

This remark shows that a homeomorphism $f : X \to Y$ gives us a bijective correspondence not only between X and Y but between the collections of open sets of X and of Y.As a result,any property of X that is entirely expressed in terms of the topology of X (that is,in terms of the open sets of X) yields,via the corresponderice $f ,$ the corresponding property for the space Y. Such a property of X is called a topological property of X.

You may have studied in modern algebra the notion of an isomorphism between algebraic objects such as groups or rings. An isomorphism is a bijective correspondence that preserves the algebraic structure involved. The analogous concept in topology is that of homeomorphism; it is a bijective correspondence that preserves the topological structure involved.

Now suppose that $f : X \to Y$ is an injective continuous map,where X and Y are topological spaces.Let Z be the image set $f ( X )$ ,considered as a subspace of Y; then the functon $f ^ { \prime } : X \to Z$ obtained by restricting the range of f is bijective.If $f ^ { \prime }$ happens to be a homeomorphism of X with Z,we say that the map $f : X \to Y$ is a topological imbedding,or simply an imbedding,of X in Y.

EXAMPLE 4．The function $\boldsymbol { f } \cdot \mathbb { R }  \mathbb { R }$ given by $f ( x ) = 3 x + 1$ is a homeomorphism See Figure 18 2.If we define $g \cdot \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ by the equation

$$
g ( y ) = { \frac { 1 } { 3 } } ( y - 1 )
$$

then one can check easily that $f ( g ( y ) ) = y$ and $g ( f ( x ) ) = x$ for all real numbers x and y It follows that $f$ is bijective and that $g = f ^ { - 1 }$ ,the continuity of $f$ and $\pmb { \mathscr { z } }$ is a familiar result from calculus.

ExAMPLE 5The function F .(-1,1) → R defined by

$$
F ( x ) = { \frac { x } { 1 - x ^ { 2 } } }
$$

is a homeomorphism See Figure I8.3 We have already noted in Example 9of $\ S 3$ that $\pmb { F }$ is a bijective order-preserving correspondence,its inverse is the function G defined by

$$
G ( y ) = \frac { 2 y } { 1 + ( 1 + 4 y ^ { 2 } ) ^ { 1 / 2 } } .
$$

The fact that $\pmb { F }$ is a homeomorphism can be proved in two ways One way is to note that because $\pmb { F }$ is order preserving and bijective, $\pmb { F }$ carnes a basis element for the order topology in(-l,1) onto a basis element for the order topology in R and vice versa As a result, $\pmb { F }$ is automatically a homeomorphism of (-l,l) with R (both in the order topology） Since the order topology on(-l,1) and the usual (subspace)topology agree, $_ { F }$ is a homeomorphism of(-l,I) with R

<!-- image-->  
Figure 18.2

<!-- image-->

A second way to show Fa homeomorphism is to use the continuity of the algebraic functions and the square-root function to show that both $\pmb { F }$ and $\pmb { G }$ are continuous These are familiar facts from calculus

EXAMPLE 6A bijective function $f \cdot X \to Y$ can be continuous without being a homeomorphism One such function is the identity map $g \mathbb { R } _ { t }  \mathbb { R }$ considered in Example 3 Another is the following Let $s ^ { 1 }$ denote the unit circle、

$$
S ^ { 1 } = \{ x \times y \mid x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } = 1 \} ,
$$

considered as a subspace of the plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and let

$$
{ \pmb F } \cdot [ { \pmb 0 } , 1 ) \longrightarrow \mathcal { S } ^ { 1 }
$$

be the map defined by $f ( t ) = ( \cos 2 \pi t , \sin 2 \pi t )$ .The fact that f is bijective and continuous follows from famuliar properties of the trigonometric functions. But the functon $f ^ { - 1 }$ is not continuous The image under f of the open set $U = \{ 0 , \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 4 } } \}$ of the domain,for instance,is not open in $s ^ { 1 }$ ,for the point $p = f ( 0 )$ les in no open set V of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ such that $V \cap S ^ { 1 } \subset f ( U )$ . See Figure 18.4.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 18.4  
EXAMPLE 7.Consider the function

$$
g : [ 0 , 1 ) \longrightarrow \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }
$$

obtained from the function f of the preceding example by expanding the range. The map g is an example of a continuous injective map that is not an imbedding

## Constructing Continuous Functions

How does one go about constructing continuous functions from one topological space to another? There are a number of methods used in analysis,of which some generalize to arbitrary topological spaces and others do not. We study first some constructions that do hold for general topological spaces,deferring consideration of the others until later.

Theorem 18.2 (Rules for constructing continuous functions). Let X,Y,and Z be topological spaces.

(a)(Constant function) $I f f . X \to Y$ maps all of X into the single point yo of Y, then f is continuous.

(b) (Inclusion) If A is a subspace of X,the inclusion function $j : A \to X$ is continuous.

(c)(Composites） If $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to z$ are continuous,then the map $g \circ f : X \to Z$ is continuous.

(d) (Restricting the domain） If $f : X \to Y$ is continuous,and if A is a subspace ofX,then the restricted function $f | A \cdot A \to Y$ is continuous.

(e) (Restricting or expanding the range) Let $f \cdot X \to Y$ be continuous. If Z is a subspace of Y containing the image set $f ( X )$ ，thenthe function $g : X \to Z$ obtained by restricting the range of f is contunuous.If Z is a space having Y as a subspace,then the function $h : X \to Z$ obtained by expanding the range of f is continuous.

(f) (Local formulation of continuity) The map $f : X \to Y$ is continuous if X can be written as the union of open sets $U _ { \alpha }$ such that $f | U _ { \alpha }$ is continuous for each α.

Proof(a) Let $f ( x ) = y _ { 0 }$ for every x in X. Let V be open in Y. The set $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ equals X or ,depending on whether V contains yo or not. In either case,it is open.

(b) If U is open in X,then $j ^ { - 1 } ( U ) = U \cap A$ ,which is open in Aby definition of the subspace topology.

(c) If U is open in Z,then $g ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is open in Y and $f ^ { - 1 } ( g ^ { - 1 } ( U ) )$ is open in X. But

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( g ^ { - 1 } ( U ) ) = ( g \circ f ) ^ { - 1 } ( U ) ,
$$

by elementary set theory.

(d) The function flA equals the composite of the inclusion map $j : A \to X$ and the map $f : X \to Y$ ,both of which are continuous.

(e) Let $f : X \to Y$ be continuous. If $f ( X ) \subset Z \subset Y$ ,we show that the function $g : X \to Z$ obtained from f is continuous.Let B be open in Z.Then $B = Z \cap U$ for some open set U of Y. Because Z contains the entire image set $f ( X )$

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( U ) = g ^ { - 1 } ( B ) ,
$$

by elementary set theory. Since $f ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is open, so is $g ^ { - 1 } ( B )$

To show $h : X \to Z$ is continuous if Z has Y as a subspace,note that h is the composite of the map $f : X \to Y$ and the inclusion map $j : Y \to Z$

(f) By hypothesis,we can write X as a union of open sets $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,such that $f | U _ { \alpha }$ is continuous for each α. Let V be an open set in Y. Then

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) \cap U _ { \alpha } = ( f | U _ { \alpha } ) ^ { - 1 } ( V ) ,
$$

because both expressions represent the set of those points x lying in $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for which $f ( x ) \in V$ .Since $f | U _ { \alpha }$ is continuous,this set is open in $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,and hence open in X But

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = \bigcup _ { \alpha } ( f ^ { - 1 } ( V ) \cap U _ { \alpha } ) ,
$$

so that $f ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ is also open in X.

Theorem 18.3 (The pasting lemma). Let $X = A \cup B$ ，where A andB are closed in X.Let $f : A \to Y$ and $g : B \to Y$ be continuous.If $f ( x ) = g ( x )$ for every $x \in A \cap B$ ,thenf and g combine to give a continuous function $h : X \to Y$ ,defined by setting $h ( x ) = f ( x ) \ i f x \in A$ and $h ( x ) = g ( x ) \ i f x \in B$

Proof.Let C be a closed subset of Y. Now

$$
h ^ { - 1 } ( C ) = f ^ { - 1 } ( C ) \cup g ^ { - 1 } ( C ) ,
$$

by elementary set theory. Since f is continuous, $f ^ { - 1 } ( C )$ is closed in A and,therefore, closed in X. Similarly, $g ^ { - t } ( C )$ is closed in B and therefore closed in X.Their union $h ^ { - 1 } ( C )$ is thus closed in X. □

This theorem also holds if A and B are open sets in X; this is just a special case of the "local formulation of continuity"rule given in preceding theorem.

EXAMPLE 8Let us define a function $\pmb { h } : \mathbb { R }  \mathbb { R }$ by setting

$$
h ( x ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { x } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \leq 0 , } \\ { x / 2 } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \geq 0 } \end{array} \right. }
$$

Each of the “pieces"of this definition is a continuous function,and they agree on the Overlapping part of their domains,which is the one-point set {O}. Since their domains are closed in R,the function h is continuous. One needs the "pieces"of the function to agre on the overlapping part of their domains in order to have a function at all.The equations

$$
k ( x ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { x - 2 } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \leq 0 , } \\ { x + 2 } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \geq 0 , } \end{array} \right. }
$$

for instance,do not define a function On the other hand,one needs some limitations on the sets A and B to guarantee continuity.The equations

$$
l ( x ) = \left\{ { \begin{array} { l l } { x - 2 } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x < 0 , } \\ { x + 2 } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \geq 0 , } \end{array} } \right.
$$

for instance,do define a function l mapping R into R,and both of the pieces are continuous. Butlis not continuous; the inverse image of the open set (1,3),for instance,is the nonopen set [0.1） See Figure 18.5

<!-- image-->  
Figure 18.5

Theorem 18.4 (Maps into products). Let $f : A \to X \times Y$ be given by the equation

$$
f ( a ) = ( f _ { 1 } ( a ) , f _ { 2 } ( a ) ) .
$$

Then $f$ is continuous if and only if the functions

$$
f _ { 1 } \ . \ A \longrightarrow X \qquad a n d \quad f _ { 2 } : A \longrightarrow Y
$$

are continuous.

The maps $f _ { \mathrm { l } }$ and $f _ { 2 }$ are called the coordinate functions of $f .$

Proof. Let $\pi _ { 1 } \cdot X \times Y \to X$ and $\pi _ { 2 } : X \times Y \to Y$ be projections onto the first and second factors,respectively. These maps are continuous.For $\pi _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } ( U ) = U \times Y$ and $\pi _ { 2 } ^ { - 1 } ( V ) = X \times V$ , and these sets are open if $\pmb { U }$ and V are open. Note that for each $a \in A$

$$
f _ { 1 } ( a ) = \pi _ { 1 } ( f ( a ) ) \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } f _ { 2 } ( a ) = \pi _ { 2 } ( f ( a ) ) .
$$

If the function f is continuous,then $f _ { 1 }$ and $f _ { 2 }$ are composites of continuous functions and therefore continuous. Conversely, suppose that $f _ { 1 }$ and $f _ { 2 }$ are continuous.We show that for each basis element $U \times V$ for the topology of $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \cal Y }$ ,its inverse image $f ^ { - 1 } ( U \times V )$ is open. A point a is in $f ^ { - 1 } ( U \times V )$ if and only if $f ( a ) \in U \times V$ ,that is, if and only if $f _ { 1 } ( a ) \in U$ and $f _ { 2 } ( a ) \in V$ . Therefore,

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( U \times V ) = f _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } ( U ) \cap f _ { 2 } ^ { - 1 } ( V ) .
$$

Since both of the sets $f _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ and $f _ { 2 } ^ { - 1 } ( V )$ are open,so is their intersection.

There is no useful criterion for the continuity of a map $f : A \times B \to X$ whose domain is a product space. One might conjecture that f is continuous if it is continuous "in each variable separately," but this conjecture is not true. (See Exercise l2.)

EXAMPLE 9In calculus,a parametrized curve in the plane is defined to be a continuous map $\begin{array} { r l } { f } & { { } [ a , b ] \to \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } } \end{array}$ It is often expressed in the form $f ( t ) = ( x ( t ) , y ( t ) )$ and one frequently uses the fact that $f$ is a continuous function of t if both x and yare Simularly, a vector fieldinthe plane

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { \mathfrak { v } } ( x , y ) = P ( x , y ) \mathbf { i } + Q ( x , y ) \mathbf { j } } \\ { = ( P ( x , y ) , Q ( x , y ) ) } \end{array}
$$

is said to be conunuous if both P and $Q$ are continuous functions,or equivalently,if v is continuous as a map of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ into $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ 、Both of these statements are simply special cases of the preceding theorem.

One way of formung continuous functions that is used a great deal in analysis is to take sums,differences,products,or quotients of continuous real-valued functions. It isa standard theorem that if $f , g \ . \ X \to \mathbb { R }$ are continuous,then $f + g , f - g$ ,and $f \cdot g$ are continuous,and $f / g$ is continuous if $g ( { \pmb x } ) \neq 0$ for all x.We shallconsider this theorem in \$2l.

Yet another method for constructing continuous functions that is familiar from analysis is to take the limit of an infinite sequence of functions.There is a theorem to the effect that if a sequence of continuous real-valued functions of a real variable converges uniformly to a limit function,then the limit function is necessarily continuous. This theorem is called the Uniform Limit Theorem. It is used,for instance.to demonstrate the continuity of the trigonometric functions,when one defines these functions rigorously using the infinite series definitions of the sine and cosine. This theorem generalizes to a theorem about maps of an arbitrary topological space X into a metric space Y.We shall prove it in \$21.

## Exercises

1.Prove that for functions $f . \mathbb { R }  \mathbb { R }$ the ${ \epsilon { - } } \delta$ definition of continuity implies the open set definition.

2.Suppose that $f : X \to Y$ is continuous.If x is a limit point of the subset A of X, is it necessarily true that $f ( x )$ is a limit point of $f ( A ) ?$

3. Let X and $\pmb { X } ^ { \prime }$ denote a single set in the two topologies $\mathcal { T }$ and $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime }$ ,respectively. Let $i : X ^ { \prime } \to X$ be the identity function.

(a） Show that i is continuous ${ \mathcal { T } } ^ { \prime }$ is finer than $\tau$

(b）Show that i is a homeomorphism $\mathcal { T } ^ { \prime } = \mathcal { T }$

4. Given $x _ { 0 } \in X$ and $y _ { 0 } \in Y$ , show that the maps $f : X \to X \times Y$ and $g : Y $ $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { \cal Y }$ defined by

$$
f ( x ) = x \times y _ { 0 } { \mathrm { a n d } } g ( y ) = x _ { 0 } \times y
$$

are imbeddings.

5.Show that the subspace $( a , b )$ of R is homeomorphuc with (O,l) and the subspace $\left[ a , b \right]$ of R is homeomorphic with [0,1]

6.Find a function $f : \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ that is continuous at precisely one point.

7. (a) Suppose that $f \cdot \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ is “continuous from the rght," that is,

$$
\operatorname* { l i m } _ { x \to a ^ { + } } f ( x ) = f ( a ) ,
$$

for each $a \in \mathbb { R }$ 、Show that f is continuous when considered as a function from $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell }$ to R.

(b） Can you conjecture what functions $f \cdot \mathbb { R } \to \mathbb { R }$ are continuous w hen considered as maps from R to $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ?$ As maps from $\mathbb { R } _ { t }$ to $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ?$ We shall return to this question in Chapter 3.

8.Let Y be an ordered set in the order topology. Let $f , g : X \to Y$ be continuous.

(a) Show that the set $\{ x \mid f ( x ) \leq g ( x ) \}$ is closed in X

(b）Let $h : X \to Y$ be the function

$$
h ( x ) = \operatorname* { m i n } \{ f ( x ) , g ( x ) \} .
$$

Show that h is continuous [Hint: Use the pasting lemma.]

9. Let $\left\{ A _ { \alpha } \right\}$ be a collection of subsets of X; let $\textstyle X = \bigcup _ { \alpha } A _ { \alpha }$ .Let $f : X \to Y$ suppose that $f | A _ { \alpha }$ ,is continuous for each α.

(a） Show that if the collection $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is finite and each set $\pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is closed,then f is continuous.

(b）Find an example where the collection $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is countable and each $\pmb { A _ { \alpha } }$ is closed,but f is not continuous.

(c）An indexed family of sets $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is said to be locally finite if each point x of X has a neighborhood that intersects $\pmb { A _ { \alpha } }$ for only finitely many values of α. Show that if the family $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ is locally finite and each $\pmb { A _ { \alpha } }$ is closed, then f is continuous.

10.Let $f \cdot A \to B$ and $g : C \to D$ be continuous functions. Let us define a map $f \times g : A \times C \to B \times D$ by the equation

$$
( f \times g ) ( a \times c ) = f ( a ) \times g ( c ) .
$$

Show that $f \times g$ is continuous.

11. Let $F : X \times Y  z$ .We say that F is continuous in each variable separately if for each yo in Y,the map $h : X \to Z$ defined by $h ( x ) = F ( x \times y _ { 0 } )$ is continuous, and for each $\pmb { x } _ { 0 }$ in X,the map $k \cdot Y \to Z$ defined by $k ( y ) = F ( x _ { 0 } \times y )$ is continuous.Show that ifF is continuous,then F is continuous in each variable separately.

12. Let $\pmb { F } \cdot \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R }  \mathbb { R }$ be defined by the equation

$$
F ( x \times y ) = { \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { x y / ( x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } ) } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x \times y \neq 0 \times 0 . } \\ { 0 } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } } x \times y = 0 \times 0 } \end{array} \right. }
$$

(a） Show that F is continuous in each vanable separately.

(b) Compute the function g : R → R defined by $g ( x ) = F ( x \times x )$

(c） Show that F is not continuous

13. Let $\textbf { \em A } \subset \mathbb { X } ;$ let $f : A \to Y$ be continuous; let Y be Hausdorff. Show that if f may be extended to a continuous function $g \ . \ { \bar { A } }  Y$ ,then g is uniquely determined by f

## \$19 The Product Topology

We now return,for the remainder of the chapter, to the consideration of various methods for imposing topologies on sets

Previously,we defined a topology on the product $\pmb { X } \times \pmb { Y }$ of two topologic al spaces. In the present section, we generalize this definition to more general cartesian products.

So let us consider the cartesian products

$$
X _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times X _ { n } \mathrm { a n d } X _ { 1 } \times X _ { 2 } \times \cdots ,
$$

where each $\pmb { X } _ { i }$ is a topological space There are two possible ways to proceed. One way is to take as basis all sets of the form $U _ { 1 } \times \cdots \times U _ { n }$ in the first case,and of the form $U _ { 1 } \times U _ { 2 } \times \textrm { -- }$ in the second case,where $U _ { i }$ is an open set of $\pmb { { \cal X } } _ { i }$ for each i. This procedure does indeed define a topology on the cartesian product; we shall callit the box topology.

Another way to proceed is to generalize the subbasis formulation of the definition, given in §15.In this case,we take as a subbasis allsets of the form $\pi _ { i } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { i } )$ ,where i is any index and $U _ { i }$ is an open set of $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ .We shallcall thstopologytheproduct topology.

How do these topologies differ? Consider the typical basis element B for the second topology. It is a finite intersection of subbasis elements $\pi _ { \iota } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { i } )$ , say for $i =$ $i _ { 1 } , \ldots , i _ { k }$ ．Then a point x belongs to B if and only if $\pi _ { \iota } ( \mathbf { x } )$ belongs to $U _ { \pmb { \mathscr { \prime } } }$ for $i \ =$ $i _ { 1 } , . . , i _ { k }$ ：there is no restriction on $\pi _ { i } ( x )$ for other values of i.

It follows that these two topologies agree for the finite cartesian product and differ for the infinite product. What is notclear is why we seemto preferthe second topology. This is the question we shall explore in this section

Before proceeding, however, we shall introduce a more general notion of cartesian product. So far,we have defined the cartesian product of an indexed family of sets onlyin the cases where the index set was the set $\{ 1 , ~ \ldots , n \}$ or the set $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ Now we consider the case where the index set is completely arbitrary.

Definition.Let J be an index set. Given a set X,we define a J-tuple of elements of X to be a function $\mathbf { x } : J \to X$ . If α is an element of J,we often denote the value of x at α by $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ rather than x(α); we call it the αth coordinate of x. And we often denote the function x itself by the symbol

$$
( x _ { \alpha } ) _ { \alpha \in J } ,
$$

which is as close as we can come to a“tuple notation"for an arbitrary index set J. We denote the set of all J-tuples of elements of X by $X ^ { J }$

Definition. Let $\{ A _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ be an indexed family of sets;let $\textstyle X = \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha }$ The cartesian product of this indexed famuly, denoted by

$$
\prod _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha } ,
$$

is defined to be the set of all J-tuples $( x _ { \alpha } ) _ { \alpha \in J }$ of elements of X such that $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } } \in \pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for each $\pmb { \alpha } \in \mathcal { I }$ That is,it is the set of all functions

$$
\mathbf { x } : J \to \bigcup _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha }
$$

such that $\mathbf { x } ( \alpha ) \in A _ { \alpha }$ for each $\pmb { \alpha } \in \pmb { J }$

Occasionally we denote the product simply by $\prod A _ { \alpha }$ ，and its general element by $( x _ { \alpha } )$ ,if the index set is understood

If all the sets ${ \pmb A } _ { { \pmb \alpha } }$ are equal to one set X,then the cartesian product $\Pi _ { \alpha \in J } A _ { \alpha }$ is just the set $\pmb { \chi } ^ { J }$ of all J-tuples of elements of X.We sometimes use “tuple notation" for the elements of $\pmb { \chi } ^ { J }$ ,and sometimes we use functional notation,depending on which is more convenient.

Definition. Let $\{ X _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ be an indexed family of topological spaces.Let us take as a basis for a topology on the product space

$$
\prod _ { \alpha \in J } X _ { \alpha }
$$

the collection of all sets of the form

$$
\prod _ { \alpha \in J } U _ { \alpha } ,
$$

where $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is open in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,for each $\alpha \in J$ .The topology generated by this basis is called the box topology

This collection satisfies the first condition for a basis because $\Pi { \pmb X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is itself a basis element; and it satisfies the second condition because the intersection of any two basis elements is another basis element.

$$
( \prod _ { \alpha \in J } U _ { \alpha } ) \cap ( \prod _ { \alpha \in J } V _ { \alpha } ) = \prod _ { \alpha \in J } ( U _ { \alpha } \cap V _ { \alpha } ) .
$$

Now we generalize the subbasis formulation of the definition. Let

$$
\pi _ { \beta } : \prod _ { \alpha \in J } X _ { \alpha } \to X _ { \beta }
$$

be the function assigning to each element of the product space its βth coordinate,

$$
\pi _ { \beta } ( ( x _ { \alpha } ) _ { \alpha \in J } ) = x _ { \beta } ;
$$

it is called the projection mapping associated with the index $\pmb { \beta } .$

Definition. Let $\ S _ { \beta }$ denote the collection

$$
{ \mathcal { S } } _ { \beta } = \{ \pi _ { \beta } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \beta } ) \mid U _ { \beta } { \mathrm { ~ o p e n ~ i n ~ } } X _ { \beta } \} ,
$$

and let S denote the union of these collections,

$$
\mathcal { S } = \bigcup _ { \beta \in J } \mathcal { S } _ { \beta } .
$$

The topology generated by the subbasis S is called the product topology.In this topology $\Pi _ { \alpha \epsilon J } X _ { \alpha }$ is called a product space.