<!-- image-->  
Figure 58.1

These comments lead us to formulate a more general situation in which the same procedure applies.

Definition. Let A be a subspace of X.We say that A is a deformation retract of X if the identity map of X is homotopic to a map that carries allof X into A,such that each point of A remains fixed during the homotopy. This means that there is a continuous map $H : X \times I \to X$ such that $\pmb { H } ( \pmb { x } , 0 ) = \pmb { x }$ and $H ( x , 1 ) \in A$ for all $x \in X$ ,and $H ( a , t ) = a$ for all $a \in A$ .The homotopy H is called a deformation retraction of X onto A. The map $r \cdot X  A$ defined by the equation $\pmb { r } ( \pmb { x } ) = \pmb { H } ( \pmb { x } , \pmb { 1 } )$ is aretraction of X onto A,and H is a homotopy between the identity map of X and the map jor, where $j : A \to X$ is inclusion.

The proof of the preceding theorem generalizes immediately to prove the following:

Theorem 58.3. Let A be a deformation retract of X; let $x _ { 0 } \in A$ .Then the inclusion map

$$
j : ( A , x _ { 0 } )  ( X , x _ { 0 } )
$$

induces an isomorphism offundamental groups.

EXAMPLE l．Let B denote the z-axis in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ Consider the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 } - B$ It has the punctured xy-plane $( \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \mathbf { 0 } ) \times 0$ asa deformaton retract The map H defined by the equation

$$
H ( x , y , z , t ) = ( x , y , ( 1 - t ) z )
$$

isa deformation retraction; it gradually collapses each line parallel to the z-axis into the point where the line intersects the xy-plane.We conclude that the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 } - B$ has an infinite cyclic fundamental group.

EXAMPLE 2. Consider $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - p - q$ ，thedoubly punctured plane.We assert it has the “figure eight"space as a deformation reiract. Rather than writing equations,we merely sketch the deformation retraction; it is the three-stage deformation indicated in Figure 58.2.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 58.2  
EXAMPLE 3.Another deformation retract of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - p - q$ is the “theta space"

$$
\theta = S ^ { 1 } \cup ( 0 \times \lfloor - 1 , 1 \rfloor ) ;
$$

we leave it to you to sketch the maps involved.As a result,the figure eight and the theta space have isomorphic fundamentai groups,even though neither is a deformation retract of the o1her.

Of course,we do not know anything about the fundamental group of the figure eight as yet. But we shall.

The example of the figure eight and the theta space suggests the possibility that there might be a more general way of showing two spaces have isomorphic fundamental groups than by showing that one is homeomorphic to a deformation retract of the other. We formulate such a notion now.

Definition.Let $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to X$ be continuous maps. Suppose that the map $g \circ f : X \to X$ is homotopic to the identity map of X,and the map $f \circ g : Y \to Y$ is homotopic to the identity map of Y.Then the maps f and g are called homotopy equivalences,and each is said to be a homotopy inverse of the other.

It is straightforward to show that if $f : X \to Y$ is a homotopy equivalence of X with Yand $h : Y \to Z$ is a homotopy equivalence of Y with Z,then h o $f : X \to Z$ is a homotopy equivalence of X with Z. It follows that the relation of homotopy equivalence is an equivalence relation. Two spaces that are homotopy equi valent are said to have the same homotopy $\pmb { \operatorname { \pmb { \mathscr { P } } } } \pmb { \mathscr { P } } ^ { e } .$

Note that if A is a deformation retract of X,then A has the same homotopy type as X.For let $j : A \to X$ be the inclusion mapping and let $r : X \to A$ be the retraction mapping.Then the composite $\boldsymbol { r } \circ \boldsymbol { j }$ equals the identity map of A,and the composite $j \circ r$ is by hypothesis homotopic to the identity map of X (and in fact each point of A remains fixed during the homotopy).

We now show that two spaces having the same homotopy type have iSomorphic fundamental groups. For this purpose,we need to study what happens when we have a homotopy between two continuous maps of X into Y such that the base point of X does not remain fixed during the homotopy.

Lemma 58.4.Let $h , k : X \to Y$ be continuous maps; let $h ( x _ { 0 } ) = y _ { 0 }$ and $k ( x _ { 0 } ) = y _ { 1 }$ If h and k are homotopic,there is apath α in Y from yo to $y _ { 1 }$ such that $k _ { * } = \hat { \alpha } \circ h _ { * }$ Indeed, if $\pmb { { \cal H } } : { \pmb { { \cal X } } } \times { \pmb { { \cal I } } }  { \pmb { { \cal Y } } }$ is the homotopybetween h and k,then α is the path $\alpha ( t ) = H ( x _ { 0 } , t )$

$$
\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) { \overset { h _ { * } } { \longleftrightarrow } } \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )
$$

Proof. Let $f : I \to X$ be a loop in X based at xo.We must show that

$$
k _ { * } ( [ f ] ) = \hat { \alpha } ( h _ { * } ( [ f ] ) .
$$

This equation states that $[ k \circ f ] = [ \bar { \alpha } ] * [ h \circ f ] * [ \alpha ]$ ,or equivalently, that

$$
[ \alpha ] * [ k \circ f ] = [ h \circ f ] * [ \alpha ] .
$$

This is the equation we shall venfy.

To begin,consider the loops $f _ { 0 }$ and $f _ { 1 }$ in the space $X \times I$ given by the equations

$$
f _ { 0 } ( s ) = ( f ( s ) , 0 ) \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } f _ { 1 } ( s ) = ( f ( s ) , 1 ) .
$$

Consider also the path c in $X \times I$ given by the equation

$$
c ( t ) = ( x _ { 0 } , t ) .
$$

<!-- image-->

Then $H \circ f _ { 0 } = h \circ f$ and $H \circ f _ { 1 } = k \circ f$ ,while Hoc equals the path α. See Figure 58.3. Let $F : I \times I \to X \times I$ be the map $F ( s , t ) = ( f ( s ) , t )$ .Consider the following paths in $I \times I ,$ .which run along the four edges of $I \times I !$

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \beta _ { 0 } ( s ) = ( s , 0 ) \quad } & { { } \mathrm { a n d } \quad } & { \beta _ { 1 } ( s ) = ( s , 1 ) , } \\ { \gamma _ { 0 } ( t ) = ( 0 , t ) \quad } & { { } \mathrm { a n d } \quad } & { \gamma _ { 1 } ( t ) = ( 1 , t ) . } \end{array}
$$

Then $F \circ \beta \circ = f \circ$ and $F \circ \beta _ { 1 } = f _ { 1 }$ ,while $F \circ \gamma _ { 0 } = F \circ \gamma _ { 1 } = c .$

The broken-line paths $\beta _ { 0 } * \gamma _ { 1 }$ and $\gamma _ { 0 } * \beta _ { 1 }$ are paths in $I \times I$ from (0,0) to (1, 1); since $I \times I$ is convex,there is a path homotopy G between them. Then $\pmb { F } \circ \pmb { G }$ is a path homotopy in $X \times I$ between $f _ { 0 } * c \ \mathrm { a n d } \ c * f _ { 1 }$ . And $H \circ ( F \circ G )$ is a path homotopy in Y between

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { ( H \circ f _ { 0 } ) \ast ( H \circ c ) = ( h \circ f ) \ast \alpha \qquad \mathrm { a n d } } \\ & { ( H \circ c ) \ast ( H \circ f _ { 1 } ) = \alpha \ast ( k \circ f ) , } \end{array}
$$

as desired.

Corollary 58.5. Let h,k :X →Y be homotopic continuous maps; let $h ( x _ { 0 } ) = y _ { 0 }$ and $k ( x _ { 0 } ) = y _ { 1 } . \ I f h _ { * }$ is injective,or surjective,or trivial, so is ${ \pmb k } _ { \ast }$

Corollary 58.6. Let $h : X \to Y$ .If h is nulhomotopic,then h.is the trivial homomorphism.

Proof.The constant map induces the trivial homomorphism.

Theorem 58.7. Let $f : X \to Y$ be continuous;let $f ( x _ { 0 } ) = y _ { 0 }$ If f is a homotopy equivalence,then

$$
f _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )
$$

is an isomorphism.

Proof.Let $g : Y \to X$ be a homotopy inverse for $f .$ Consider the maps

$$
( X , x _ { 0 } ) { \xrightarrow { \ f \ } } ( Y , y _ { 0 } ) { \xrightarrow { \ g \ } } ( X , x _ { 1 } ) { \xrightarrow { \ f \ } } ( Y , y _ { 1 } ) ,
$$

where $x _ { 1 } = g ( y _ { 0 } )$ and $y _ { 1 } = f ( x _ { 1 } )$ ．We have the corresponding induced homomorphisms:

$$
\begin{array} { l } { \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \xrightarrow [ 3 ] { ( f _ { x _ { 0 } } ) _ { * } } \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } ) } \\ { \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } ) \xrightarrow [ 3 ] { * } \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 1 } ) } \\ { \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 1 } ) \xrightarrow [ ] { \ell _ { f _ { x _ { 1 } } } ) _ { * } } \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 1 } ) } \end{array}
$$

[Here we have to distinguish between the homomorphisms induced byf relative to two different base points.] Now

$$
g \circ f : ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow ( X , x _ { 1 } )
$$

is by hypothesis homotopic to the identity map,so there is a path α in X such that

$$
( g \circ f ) _ { * } = \hat { \alpha } \circ ( i _ { X } ) _ { * } = \hat { \alpha } .
$$

It follows that $( g \circ f ) _ { * } = g _ { * } \circ ( f _ { x _ { 0 } } )$ \* is an isomorphism.

Similarly, because $f \circ g$ is homotopic to the identity map $i \gamma$ ,the homomorphism $( f \circ g ) _ { * } = ( f _ { x _ { 1 } } ) _ { * } \circ g _ { * }$ is an isomorphism.

The first fact implies that ${ \pmb g } *$ is surjective,and the second implies that ${ \pmb g } _ { \ast }$ is in-jective. Therefore, ${ \pmb g } _ { \ast }$ is an isomorphism.Applying the first equation once again, we conclude that

$$
( f _ { x _ { 0 } } ) _ { * } = ( g _ { * } ) ^ { - 1 } \circ \hat { \alpha } ,
$$

so that $( f _ { x _ { 0 } } )$ \* is also an isomorphism.

Note that although $\pmb { g }$ is a homotopy inverse for $f ,$ the homomorphism $\pmb { \cal { E } } :$ is not an inverse for the homomorphism $( f _ { x _ { 0 } } ) ,$ \*·

The relation of homotopy equivalence is clearly more general than the notion of deformation retraction． The theta space and the figure eight are both deformation retracts of the doubly punctured plane.Therefore,they are homotopy equivalent to the doubly punctured plane,and hence to each other. But neither is homeomorphic to a deformation retract of the other; in fact,neither of them can even be imbedded in the other.

It is a striking fact that the situation that occurs for these two spaces is the standard situation regarding homotopy equivalences.Martin Fuchs has proved a theorem to the effect that two spaces X and Y have the same homotopy type if and only if they are homeomorphic to deformation retracts of a single space Z.The proof,although it uses only elementary tools,is difficult [F].

## Exercises

1. Show that if A is a deformation retract of X,and B is a deformation retract of A, then B is a deformation retract of X.

2.For each of the following spaces,the fundamental group is either trivial, infinite cyclic,or isomorphic to the fundamental group of the figure eight. Determine for each space which of the three alternatives holds.

(a) The“solid torus." $B ^ { 2 } \times S ^ { 1 }$

(b）The torus T with a point removed.

(c） The cylinder $S ^ { 1 } \times I$

(d）The infinite cylinder $s ^ { 1 } \times \mathbb { R } .$

(e) ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$ with the nonnegative x,y,and z axes deleted.

The following subsets of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

(f） $\{ x \mid \| x \| > 1 \}$

(g） $\{ x \mid \| x \| \geq 1 \}$

(h) $\{ x \mid \| x \| < 1 \}$

(i) $S ^ { 1 } \cup ( \mathbb { R } _ { + } \times 0 )$

$S ^ { 1 } \cup ( \mathbb { R } _ { + } \times \mathbb { R } )$

(k) $S ^ { 1 } \cup ( \mathbb { R } \times 0 )$

(1) $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - ( \mathbb { R } _ { + } \times 0 )$

3. Show that given a colection C of spaces,the relation of homotopy equivalence is an equivalence relation on C.

4.Let X be the figure eight and let Y be the theta space. Describe maps $f : X \to Y$ and $g : Y \to X$ that are homotopy inverse to each other.

5.Recall that a space X is said to be contractible if the identity map of X to itself is nulhomotopic.Showthat X iscontractibleifandonlyif Xhasthehomotopy type of a one-point space.

6.Show that a retract of a contractible space is contractible.

7.Let A be a subspace of X; let $j : A \to X$ be the inclusion map,and let $f : X \to$ A be a continuous map. Suppose there is a homotopy $H : X \times I \to X$ between the map $j \circ f$ and the identity map of X.

(a) Show that if f is a retraction,then $j _ { \ast }$ is an isomorphism.

(b） Show that if H maps $A \times I$ into A, then $j _ { \ast }$ is an isomorphism.

(c）Give an example in which $j _ { * }$ is not an isomorphism.

\*8.Find a space X and a point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ of X such that inclusion $\{ x _ { 0 } \} \to X$ is a homotopy equivalence,but {xo} is not a deformaton retract of X．[Hint:Let X be the subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ that is the union of the line segments $( 1 / n ) \times I ,$ for $\pmb { { n } } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,the line segment $0 \times I$ ,and the line segment $I \times 0 ;$ let $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ be the point (0, 1).If $\{ x _ { 0 } \}$ is adeformation retract of X,show that for any neighborhood $\boldsymbol { U }$ of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ the path component of $\pmb { U }$ containing xo contains a neighborhood of $x _ { 0 } . ]$

9. We define the degree of a continuous map $h : { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 1 } \to { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 1 }$ as follows:

Let bo be the point (1,0) of $s ^ { 1 }$ ; choose a generator y for the infinite cyclc group $\pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , b _ { 0 } )$ .If $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ is any point of $s ^ { \mathbf { 1 } }$ , choose a path α in $s ^ { 1 }$ from $b _ { 0 }$ to $\pmb { x 0 }$ and define $\gamma ( x _ { 0 } ) = { \hat { \alpha } } ( \gamma )$ . Then $\gamma ( \pmb { x } _ { 0 } )$ generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , x _ { 0 } )$ . The element $\gamma ( \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } )$ is independent of the choice of the path α,since the fundamental group of $s ^ { 1 }$ is abelian.

Now given h $; S ^ { 1 } \to S ^ { 1 }$ , choose $\boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } \in S ^ { 1 }$ and let $h ( x _ { 0 } ) = x _ { 1 }$ . Consider the homomorphism

$$
h _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , x _ { 1 } ) .
$$

Since both groups are infinite cyclic,we have

$$
h _ { * } ( \gamma ( x _ { 0 } ) ) = d \cdot \gamma ( x _ { 1 } )\tag{*}
$$

for some integer d,if the group is written additvely. The integer d is called the degree of h and is denoted by deg h.

The degree of h is independent of the choice of the generator y; choosing the other generator would merely change the sign of both sides of (\*).

(a） Show thatd is independent of the choice of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$

(b) Show that if $h , k : \bar { S } ^ { 1 } \to S ^ { 1 }$ are homotopic, they have the same degree.

(c）Show that deg(h ok) = (deg h)·(deg k).

(d） Compute the degrees of the constant map,the identity map,the reflection map $\rho ( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } ) = ( x _ { 1 } , - x _ { 2 } )$ , and the map $h ( z ) = z ^ { n }$ ,where z is a complex number.

\*(e） Show that if $h , k : S ^ { 1 } \to S ^ { 1 }$ have the same degree,they are homotopic.

10.Suppose that to every map $h : S ^ { n } \to S ^ { n }$ we have assigned an integer,denoted by deg h and called the degree of h,such that:

(i) Homotopic maps have the same degree.

(ii) deg $( h \circ k ) = ( \deg h ) \cdot ( \deg k ) .$

(iii) The identity map has degree l,any constant map has degree O,and the reflection map $\rho ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n + 1 } ) = ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } , - x _ { n + 1 } )$ has degree -1.

[One can construct such a function, using the tools of algebraic topology. Intuitively, deg h measures how many times h wraps ${ \pmb S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ about itself; the sign tells you whether h preserves orientation or not.] Prove the following:

(a）There is no retraction $r : B ^ { n + 1 } \to S ^ { n }$

（b）If $h : S ^ { n } \to S ^ { n }$ has degree different from $( - 1 ) ^ { n + 1 }$ ,then h has a fi xed point. [Hint: Show that if h has no fixed point, then h is homotopic to the antipodal map ${ \pmb a } ( { \pmb x } ) = - { \pmb x } . ]$

（c）If $h : { \mathcal { S } } ^ { n } \to S ^ { n }$ has degree different from l,then h maps some point x to its antipode -x.

(d）If $\pmb { S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ has a nonvanishing tangent vector field v,then n is odd.[Hint: If u exists,show the identity map is homotopic to the antipodal map.l

## \$59 The Fundamental Group of $S ^ { n }$

Now we turn to a problem mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, the problem of showing that the sphere,torus,and double torus are surfaces that are topologically distinct. We begin with the sphere;we show that $s ^ { n }$ is simply connected for $n \geq 2$ The crucial result we need is stated in the following theorem.

Theorem 59.1． Suppose $X = U \cup V$ ,where U and V are open sets of X.Suppose that $U \cap V$ is path connected,and that $x _ { 0 } \in U \cap V$ . Leti and $j$ be the inclusion mappings of U and V,respectively, into X.Then the images of the induced homomorphisms

$$
i _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \mathrm { ~ a ~ } n d \ j _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )
$$

generate $\pi _ { \mathrm { i } } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$

Proof.This theorem states that,given any loop f in X based at $\pmb { x 0 } .$ , it is path homotopic to a product of the form $( g _ { 1 } * ( g _ { 2 } * ( \cdot \cdot \cdot * g _ { n } ) ) )$ ，where each ${ \pmb g } _ { i }$ is a loop in X based at xo that lies either in U or in V.

Step1.We show there is a subdivision $a _ { 0 } < a _ { 1 } < \cdots < a _ { n }$ of the unit interval such that $f ( a _ { i } ) \in U \cap V$ and $f ( [ a _ { i - 1 } , a _ { i } ] )$ is contained either in U or in V,for each i. To begin,choose a subdivision $b _ { 0 } , \ldots , b _ { m }$ of [0,1] such that for each i,the set $f ( [ b _ { i - 1 } , b _ { i } ] )$ is contained in either U or V.(Use the Lebesgue number lemma.） If $f ( b _ { i } )$ belongs to $U \cap V$ for eachi,we are finished.lf not,leti be an index such that $f ( b _ { i } ) \not \in U \cap V$ Each of the sets $f ( [ b _ { i - 1 } , b _ { i } ] )$ and $f ( [ b _ { i } , b _ { i + 1 } ] )$ lies either in $\boldsymbol { U }$ or in $V , \mathrm { ~ I f ~ } f ( b _ { i } ) \in U$ ,then both of these sets must lie in U;and if $f ( b _ { i } ) \in V$ ,both of them must lie in V.In either case,we may delete $b _ { i }$ ,obtaininga new subdivision $\mathtt { c 0 }$ $\cdots , \mathbb { c } _ { m - 1 }$ that still satisfies the condition that $f ( [ { \mathsf { c } } _ { i - 1 } , { \mathsf { c } } _ { i } ] )$ is contained either in $\pmb { U }$ or in V,for each i.

A finite number of repetitions of this process leads to the desired subdivision.

Step 2.We prove the theorem. Given $f$ let $a _ { 0 } , \ldots , a _ { n }$ be the subdivision constructed in Step l. Define $f _ { i }$ to be the path in X that equals the positive linear map of [0,1] onto $\left[ a _ { i - 1 } , a _ { i } \right]$ followed by $f .$ Then $f _ { i }$ is a path that lies either in $U$ or in $V _ { \ast }$ and by Theorem 51.3,

$$
[ f ] = [ f _ { 1 } ] * [ f _ { 2 } ] * \cdot \cdot \cdot * [ f _ { n } ] .
$$

For each i, choose a path ${ \pmb { \alpha } } _ { i }$ in $U \cap V$ from $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ t $f ( a _ { t } )$ . (Here we use the fact that $U \cap V$ is path connected.) Since $f ( a _ { 0 } ) = f ( a _ { n } ) = x _ { 0 }$ ,we can choose $\pmb { \alpha _ { 0 } }$ and $\alpha _ { n }$ to be the constant path at xo. See Figure 59.1.

Now we set

$$
g _ { i } = ( \alpha _ { i - 1 } * f _ { i } ) * \overline { { \alpha _ { i } } }
$$

for each i. Then $\pmb { \mathrm { \delta } } i$ is a loop in X based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ whose image lies either in U or in V Direct computation shows that

$$
[ g _ { 1 } ] * [ g _ { 2 } ] * \cdot \cdot \cdot * [ g _ { n } ] = [ f _ { 1 } ] * [ f _ { 2 } ] * \cdot \cdot \cdot * [ f _ { n } ] .
$$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 59.1

The preceding theorem is a special case of a famous theorem of topology called the Seifert-van Kampen theorem, which expresses the fundamental group of the space $\pmb { \chi } = \pmb { U } \cup \pmb { V }$ quite generally,when $U \cap V$ is path connected,in terms of the fundamental groups of U and V.We shall study this theorem in Chapter l1.

Corollary 59.2. Suppose $\pmb { \chi } = \pmb { U } \cup \pmb { V }$ ,where U and V are open sets of X ;suppose $U \cap { \boldsymbol { V } }$ is nonempty and path connected.If U and V are simply connected, then X is simply connected.

Theorem 59.3. $I f n \ge 2 ,$ ，the n-sphere $s ^ { n }$ is simply connected.

Proof. Let $p = ( 0 , \ldots , 0 , 1 ) \in \mathbb { R } ^ { n + 1 }$ and $q = ( 0 , \ldots , 0 , - 1 )$ be the “north pole" and the “south pole"of ${ \pmb S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ ,respectively.

Step 1.We show that if $n \geq 1$ , the punctured sphere $S ^ { n } - p$ is homeomorphic to R.

Define $f : ( S ^ { n } - p ) \to \mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ by the equation

$$
f ( x ) = f ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n + 1 } ) = { \frac { 1 } { 1 - x _ { n + 1 } } } ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } ) .
$$

The map f is called stereographic projection. (If one takes the straight line in $\mathbb { R } ^ { n + 1 }$ passing through the north pole p and the point x of $S ^ { n } - p$ ,then this line intersects the n-plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { n } \times \bar { 0 } \subset \mathbb { R } ^ { n + 1 }$ in the point $f ( x ) \times 0 . )$ One checks that $f$ is a homeomorphism by showing that the map $g : \mathbb { R } ^ { n } \to ( S ^ { n } - p )$ given by

$$
g ( y ) = g ( y _ { 1 } , \dots , y _ { n } ) = ( t ( y ) \cdot y _ { 1 } , \dots , t ( y ) \cdot y _ { n } , 1 - t ( y ) ) ,
$$

where $t ( y ) = 2 / ( 1 + \| y \| ^ { 2 } )$ ,is a right and left inverse for $f .$

Note that the reflection map $( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n + 1 } ) \ \to \ ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } , - x _ { n + 1 } )$ defines a homeomorphism of $S ^ { n } - p$ with $S ^ { n } - q$ ,so the latter is also homeomorphic to $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$

Step 2. We prove the theorem.Let U and V be the open sets $U = S ^ { n } - p$ and $V = S ^ { n } - q$ of $s ^ { n }$

Note first that for $n \geq 1$ ,the sphere ${ \pmb S } ^ { \pmb { n } }$ is path connected. This follows from the fact that U and V are path connected (being homeomorphic to $\mathbb { R } ^ { n } )$ and have the point $( 1 , 0 , \ldots , 0 )$ of $s ^ { n }$ in common.

Now we show that for $n \geq 2$ ，the sphere $s ^ { n }$ is simply connected.The spaces U and V are simply connected,being homeomorphic to $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ .Their intersection equals $S ^ { n } - p - q$ ,which is homeomorphic under stereographic projection to $\mathbb { R } ^ { n } - \mathbb { 0 } .$ The latter space is path connected,for every point of $\mathbb { R } ^ { n } - \mathbb { 0 }$ can be joined to a point of $S ^ { n - 1 }$ bya straight-line path,and $S ^ { n - 1 }$ is path connected if $n \geq 2$ Then the preceding corollary applies.

## Exercises

1.Let X be the union of two copies of $s ^ { 2 }$ having a single point in common. What is the fundamental group of $\pmb { X ? }$ Prove that your answer is correct. [Be careful! The union of two simply connected spaces having a point in common is not necessarily simply connected. See [S], p.59.]

2. Criticize the following "proof"that $s ^ { 2 }$ is_simply connected: Let f be a loop in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ based at $\pmb { x } _ { 0 }$ Choose a point $\pmb { p }$ of $s ^ { 2 }$ not lying in the image of $f .$ Since $S ^ { 2 } - p$ is homeomorphic with $\mathbf { \bar { R } } ^ { 2 }$ and $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is simply connected,the loop f is path homotopic to the constant loop.

3. (a) Show that $\mathbb { R } ^ { 1 }$ and $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ are not homeomorphic if $n > 1$

(b） Show that $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ and $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ are not homeomorphic if $n > 2 .$

It is, in fact, true that $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ and $\mathbb { R } ^ { n }$ are not homeomorphic if $n \neq m$ ,but the proof requires more advanced tools of algebraic topology.

4.Assume the hypotheses of Theorem 59.1.

(a) What can you say about the fundamental group of X if $j _ { \ast }$ is the trivial homomorphism?If both $\dot { \iota } _ { \ast }$ and $j _ { \ast }$ are trivial?

(b) Give an example where $i _ { * }$ and $j _ { \ast }$ are trivial but neither U nor V have trivial fundamental groups

## \$60 Fundamental Groups of Some Surfaces

Recall that a surface is a Hausdorff space with a countable basis,each point of which has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic with an open subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ . Surfaces are of interest in various parts of mathematics,including geometry,topology,and complex analysis.We consider here several surfaces,including the torus and double torus,and show by comparing their fundamental groups that they are not homeomorphic. In a later chapter,we shall classify up to homeomorphism all compact surfaces.

First,we consider the torus. In an earlier exercise,we asked you to compute its fundamental group using the theory of covering spaces. Here,we compute its fundamental group by using a theorem about the fundamental group of a product space.

Recall hat if A and B are groups with operation ·,then the cartesian prod uct $\pmb { A } \times \pmb { B }$ is given a group structure by using the operation

$$
( a \times b ) \cdot ( a ^ { \prime } \times b ^ { \prime } ) = ( a \cdot a ^ { \prime } ) \times ( b \cdot b ^ { \prime } ) .
$$

Recall also that if $h : C \to A$ and $k : C \to B$ are group homomorphisms,then the map $\Phi : C \to A \times B$ defined by $\Phi ( c ) = h ( c ) \times k ( c )$ is a group homomorphism.

Theorem 60.1. $\pi _ { 1 } ( X \times Y , x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 } )$ is isomorphic with $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \times \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )$

Proof Let $p : X \times Y \to X$ and $q : X \times Y \to Y$ be the projection mappings. If we use the base points indicated in the statement of the theorem,we have induced homomorphisms

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { p _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X \times Y , x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) , } \\ & { q _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X \times Y , x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } ) . } \end{array}
$$

We define a homomorphism

$$
\Phi : \pi _ { 1 } ( X \times Y , x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) \times \pi _ { 1 } ( Y , y _ { 0 } )
$$

by the equation

$$
\Phi ( [ f ] ) = p _ { * } ( [ f ] ) \times q _ { * } ( [ f ] ) = [ p \circ f ] \times [ q \circ f ] .
$$

We shall show thatΦ is an isomorphism.

The map is surjective.Let $g : I  X$ be a loop based at xo; let $h : I \to Y$ be a loop based at yo.We wish to show that the element $[ g ] \times [ h ]$ lies in the image of $\Phi$ Define $f : I \to X \times Y$ by the equation

$$
f ( s ) = g ( s ) \times h ( s ) .
$$

Then f is a loop in $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ based at $x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 }$ ,and

$$
\Phi ( [ f ] ) = [ p \circ f ] \times [ q \circ f ] = [ g ] \times [ h ] ,
$$

as desired.

The kernel ofΦ vanishes. Suppose that $f : I \to X \times Y$ is a loop in $\pmb { \chi } \times \pmb { Y }$ based at $x _ { 0 } \times y _ { 0 }$ and $\Phi ( [ f ] ) = [ p \circ f ] \times [ q \circ f ]$ is the identity element. This means that $p \circ f \simeq _ { p } e _ { x _ { 0 } }$ and $q \circ f \simeq _ { p } e _ { y _ { 0 } }$ ；let G and H be the respective path homotopies.Then the map $F : I \times I \to X \times Y$ defined by

$$
{ \cal F } ( s , t ) = G ( s , t ) \times { \cal H } ( s , t )
$$

is a path homotopy between f and the constant loop based at ${ \pmb x } _ { 0 } \times { \pmb y } _ { 0 }$

Corollary 60.2. The fundamental group of the torus $T = S ^ { 1 } \times S ^ { 1 }$ is isomorphic to the group $\mathbb { Z } \times \mathbb { Z }$

Now we define a surface called the projective plane and compute its fundamental group.

Definition. The projective plane $P ^ { 2 }$ is the quotient space obtained from $s ^ { 2 }$ by identifying each point x of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ with its antipodal point -x.

The projective plane may not be a space that is familiar to you; it cannot be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ and is thus difficult to visualize. It is,however, the fundamental object of study in projective geometry, just as the euclidean plane $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is in ordinary euclidean geometry. Topologists are primarily interested in it as an example of a surface.

Theorem 60.3. The projective plane $P ^ { 2 }$ is a compact surface, and the quotient map $p : { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 2 }  P ^ { 2 }$ is a covering map.

Proof.First we show that $\pmb { p }$ is an open map. Let $\boldsymbol { U }$ be open in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ .Now the antipodal map a : $s ^ { 2 } \to s ^ { 2 }$ given by $\pmb { a } ( \pmb { x } ) = - \pmb { x }$ is a homeomorphism of $s ^ { 2 }$ ; hence $a ( U )$ is open in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ . Since

$$
p ^ { - 1 } ( p ( U ) ) = U \cup a ( U ) ,
$$

this set also is open in $s ^ { 2 }$ ．Therefore,by definition, $p ( U )$ is open in $P ^ { 2 }$ A similar proof shows that $\pmb { p }$ is a closed map.

Now we show that p is a covering map.Given a point y of $P ^ { 2 }$ choose $x \in p ^ { - 1 } ( y )$ Then choose an ∈-neighborhood $\boldsymbol { U }$ of x in $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ for some $\epsilon < 1$ ,using the euclidean metnc d of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ Then $\boldsymbol { U }$ contains no pair $\{ z , a ( z ) \}$ of antipodal points of $s ^ { 2 }$ ,since $d ( z , a ( z ) ) = 2$ As a result, the map

$$
p : U \longrightarrow p ( U )
$$

is bijective. Being continuous and open, it is a homeomorphism. Similarly,

$$
p : a ( U )  p ( a ( U ) ) = p ( U )
$$

is a homeomorphism. The set $p ^ { - 1 } ( p ( U ) )$ is thus the union of the two disjoint open sets U and $a ( U )$ ,each of which is mapped homeomorphically by $\pmb { p }$ onto $p ( U )$ . Then $p ( U )$ is a neighborhood of $\pmb { p } ( \pmb { x } ) = \pmb { y }$ that is evenly covered by $p .$

Since $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ has a countable basis $\{ U _ { n } \}$ ,the space $P ^ { 2 }$ has a countable basis $\{ p ( U _ { n } ) \}$

The fact that $P ^ { 2 }$ is Hausdorff follows from the fact that $s ^ { 2 }$ is normal and $\pmb { p }$ is a closed map. (See Exercise $^ 6$ of \$31.) Alternatively, one can give a direct proof: Let $y _ { 1 }$ and $_ { y _ { 2 } }$ be two points of $P ^ { 2 }$ . The set $p ^ { - 1 } ( y _ { 1 } ) \cup p ^ { - 1 } ( y _ { 2 } )$ consists of four points; let $\pmb { 2 \epsilon }$ be the minimum distance between them. Let $U _ { 1 }$ be the E-neighborhood of one of the points of $p ^ { - 1 } ( y _ { 1 } )$ ,and let $U _ { 2 }$ be the E-neighborhood of one of the points of $p ^ { - 1 } ( y _ { 2 } )$ Then

$$
U _ { 1 } \cup a ( U _ { 1 } ) \quad \quad \mathrm { a n d } \quad \quad U _ { 2 } \cup a ( U _ { 2 } )
$$

are disjoint. It follows that $p ( U _ { \mathfrak { i } } )$ and $p ( U _ { 2 } )$ are disjoint neighborhoods of $\mathbf { \Delta } _ { \mathbf { \vec { v } } \mathbf { \vec { l } } }$ and $_ { y _ { 2 } }$ respectively, in $P ^ { 2 }$

Since ${ \dot { s } } ^ { 2 }$ is a surface and every point of $P ^ { 2 }$ has a neighborhood homeomorphic with an open subset of $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ , the space $\bar { P } ^ { 2 }$ is also a surface.

Corollary 60.4. $\pi _ { 1 } ( P ^ { 2 } , y )$ is a group of order 2.

Proof.The projection $p : \mathcal { S } ^ { 2 }  P ^ { 2 }$ is a covering map. Since $s ^ { 2 }$ is simply connected, we can apply Theorem ${ \mathfrak { s } } 4 . 4 .$ which tells us there is a bijective correspondence between $\pi _ { 1 } ( P ^ { 2 } , y )$ and the set $p ^ { - 1 } ( y )$ . Since this set is a two-element set, $\pi _ { 1 } ( P ^ { 2 } , y )$ is a group of order 2.

Any group of order 2 is isomorphic to $\mathbb { Z } / 2$ ,the integers mod 2,of course.

One can proceed similarly to define $P ^ { n }$ ,for any $\pmb { n } \in \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,as the space obtained from $s ^ { n }$ by identifying each point x with its antipode -x; it is called projective nspace. The proof of Theorem 60.3 goes through without change to prove that the projection $p : { \mathcal { S } } ^ { n }  P ^ { n }$ is a covering map.Then because $\pmb { S ^ { n } }$ is simply connected for $\pmb { n } \geq 2$ ,it follows that $\pi _ { 1 } ( P ^ { n } , y )$ is a two-element group for $\pmb { n } \geq 2$ We leave it to you to figure out what happens when $\pmb { n } = 1$

Now we study the double torus. We begin with a lemma about the figure eight.

## Lemma 60.5. The fundamental group of the figure eight is not abelian.

Proof.Let X be the union of two circles A and B in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ whose intersectiorn consists of the single point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ We describe a certain covering space E of X.

The space E is the subspace of the plane consisting of the x-axis and the y-axis, along with tiny circles tangent to these axes,one circle tangent to the x-axis at each nonzero integer point and one circle tangent to the y-axis at each nonzero integer point.

The projection map $p : E \to X$ wraps the x-axis around the circle A and wraps the y-axis around the other circle B; in each case the integer points are mapped by $\pmb { p }$ into the base point $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ Each circle tangent to an integer point on the ${ \pmb x } { \pmb x } \mathbf { i } { \mathsf { s } }$ is mapped homeomorphically by $\pmb { p }$ onto B,while each circle tangent to an integer point on the y-axis is mapped homeomorphically onto $\pmb { A } ;$ in each case the point of tarigency is mapped onto the point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ ，We leave it to you to check mentally that the map $\pmb { p }$ is indeed a covering map.

We could write this description down in equations if we wished, but the informal description seems to us easier to follow.

Now let ${ \bar { f } } : I \to E$ be the path $\tilde { f } ( s ) = s \times 0$ ，going along the x-axis from the origin to the point $1 \times 0$ Let ${ \tilde { g } } : I  E$ be the path $\bar { g } ( s ) = 0 \times s$ ,going along the y-axis from the origin to the point $0 \times 1$ . Let $\scriptstyle f = p \circ { \tilde { f } }$ and $g = p \circ { \tilde { g } } ;$ then $f$ and $\pmb { \mathscr { E } }$ are loops in the figure eight based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ ，going around the circles A and $\pmb { B } .$ respectively. See Figure 60.1.

We assert that $f * g$ and ${ \pmb { \mathscr { g } } } * f$ are not path homotopic,so that the fundamental group of the figure eight is not abelian.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 60.1  
To prove this assertion,let us lift each of these to a path in E beginning at the origin. The path $f * g$ lifts to a path that goes along the x-axis from the origin to $\mathbf { l } \times \mathbf { 0 }$ and then goes once around the circle tangent to the x-axis at $1 \times 0$ .On the other hand, the path ${ \pmb { g } } * { \pmb f }$ lifts to a path in E that goes along the y-axis from the origin to $0 \times 1$ and then goes once around the circle tangent to the y-axis at $\mathbf { 0 } \times \mathbf { 1 }$ .Since the lifted paths do not end at the same point, $f * g$ and ${ g } * f$ cannot be path homotopic.

We shall prove later that the fundamental group of the figure eight is,in fact, the group that algebraists call the “free group on two generators."

Theorem 60.6. The fundamental group of the double torus 1s not abelian.

Proof. The double torus T#T is the surface obtained by taking two copies of the torus,deleting a small open disc from each of them,and pasting the remaining pieces together along their edges.We assert that the figure eight X is a retract of ${ \pmb T } { \pmb \# } { \pmb T }$ This fact implies that inclusion $j : X \to T \# T$ induces amonomorphism $j _ { * }$ so that $\pi _ { 1 } ( T \# T , x _ { 0 } )$ is not abelian.

One can write equations for the retraction $r : T \# T \to X$ ,but it is simpler to indicate it in pictures,as we have done in Figure 6O.2.Let Y be the union of two tori having a point in common. First one maps $\pmb { T } \pmb { \# } \pmb { T }$ onto Y by a map that collapses the dotted curcle to a point but is otherwise one-to-one; it defines a homeomorphism h of

<!-- image-->  
the figure eight in T#T with the figure eight in Y.Then one retracts YontO its figure eight by mapping each cross-sectional circle to the point where it intersects the figure eight.Then one maps the figure eight in Y back onto the figure eight in T#T by the map $\pmb { h } ^ { - 1 }$ ·

Corollary 60.7.The 2-sphere,torus,projective plane, and double torus are topologically distinct.

## Exercises

1. Compute the fundamental groups of the “solid torus" $S ^ { 1 } \times B ^ { 2 }$ and the product space $s ^ { 1 } \times s ^ { 2 }$

2.Let X be the quotient space obtained from $B ^ { 2 }$ by identifying each point x of $s ^ { 1 }$ with its antipode -x. Show that X is homeomorphic to the projective plane $P ^ { 2 }$

3. Let $p : E \to X$ be the map constructed in the proof of Lemma 60.5. Let $E ^ { \prime }$ be the subspace of E that is the union of the x-axis and the y-axis.Show that $p | E ^ { \prime }$ is not a covering map.

4. The space $P ^ { 1 }$ and the covering map $p : { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 1 }  P ^ { 1 }$ are familiar ones.What are they？

5.Consider the covering map indicated in Figure 6O.3.Here,p wraps $A _ { 1 }$ around A twice and wraps $\pmb { B } _ { 1 }$ around B twice;p maps Ao and $\pmb { B } _ { 0 }$ homeomorphically onto A and B,respectively. Use this covering space to show that the fundamental group of the figure eight is not abelian.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 60.3