of $\beta ( 1 )$ contained in $U _ { 1 } \cap U _ { 2 }$ . The inclusion

$$
B ( V , \beta ) \subset B ( U _ { 1 } , \beta ) \cap B ( U _ { 2 } , \beta )
$$

follows from the definition of these sets,and the right side of the equation equals $B ( U _ { 1 } , \alpha _ { 1 } ) \cap B ( U _ { 2 } , a _ { 2 } )$ by the result just proved.

Step 3. The map p is continuous and open. It is easy to see that p is open, for the image of the basis element $B ( U , \alpha )$ is the open subset U of B: Given $x \in U$ ，we choose a pathδin U from ${ \pmb \alpha } ( 1 )$ to x;then $( \alpha * \delta ) ^ { * }$ is in $B ( U , \alpha )$ and $p ( ( \alpha * \delta ) ^ { \# } ) = x$

To show that $p$ is continuous,let us take an element $\pmb { \alpha } ^ { \# }$ of E and a neighborhood W of $p ( \alpha ^ { \# } )$ . Choose a path-connected neighborhood U of the point $p ( \alpha ^ { \# } ) = \alpha ( 1 )$ lying in W.Then $B ( U , \alpha )$ is a neighborhood of $\alpha ^ { \# }$ that $p$ maps into W. Thus p is contnuous at $\alpha ^ { \sharp }$

Step 4.Every point ofB has a neighborhood that is evenly covered by $p$ Given $b _ { 1 } \in B$ ,choose U to be a path-connected neighborhood of $\pmb { b } _ { 1 }$ that satisfies the further condition that the homomorphism $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , b _ { 1 } ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( B , b _ { 1 } )$ induced by inclusion is trivial.We assert that U is evenly covered by ${ p } .$

First,we show that $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ equals the union of the sets ${ \pmb B } ( U , { \pmb \alpha } )$ ，as α ranges over all paths in B from bo to $b _ { 1 }$ . Since $p$ maps each set $\pmb { \cal B } ( U , \pmb { \alpha } )$ onto U, it is clear that $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ contains this union. On the other hand,if $\beta ^ { \# }$ belongs to $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ ，then $\beta ( 1 ) \in U$ . Choose a path δ in U from ${ \pmb b } _ { 1 }$ to $\beta ( 1 )$ and let α be the path $\beta * \bar { \delta }$ from $b _ { 0 }$ to bj. Then $[ \beta ] = [ \alpha * \delta ]$ so that $\beta ^ { \# } = ( \alpha * \delta ) ^ { \# }$ ，which belongs to $\pmb { \cal B } ( U , \pmb { \alpha } )$ . Thus $p ^ { - 1 } ( U )$ is contained in the union of the sets $\pmb { \cal B } ( U , \pmb { \alpha } )$

Second, note that distinct sets $\pmb { \cal B } ( U , \pmb { \alpha } )$ are disjoint. For if $\beta ^ { \# }$ belongs to $B ( U , \pmb { \alpha } _ { 1 } ) \cap$ $B ( U , \pmb { \alpha } _ { 2 } )$ ,then $B ( U , \alpha _ { 1 } ) = B ( U , \beta ) = B ( U , \alpha _ { 2 } )$ ,by Step 2.

Third,we show that p defines a bijective map of $B ( U , \alpha )$ with U. It follows that $p | B ( U , \alpha )$ is a homeomorphism,being bijective and continuous and open. We already know that p maps ${ \pmb B } ( U , { \pmb \alpha } )$ onto $\pmb { U } .$ To prove injectivity,suppose that

$$
p ( ( \alpha * \delta _ { 1 } ) ^ { \# } ) = p ( ( \alpha * \delta _ { 2 } ) ^ { \# } ) ,
$$

where ${ \pmb \delta } _ { 1 }$ and $\delta _ { 2 }$ are paths in U.Then $\delta _ { 1 } ( 1 ) = \delta _ { 2 } ( 1 )$ ． Because the homomorphism $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , b _ { 1 } ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( B , b _ { 1 } )$ induced by inclusion is trivial, $\delta _ { 1 } * \bar { \delta } _ { 2 }$ is path homotopic in B to the constant loop. Then $[ \alpha \ast \delta _ { ! } ] = [ \alpha \ast \delta _ { 2 } ]$ ,so that $( \alpha * \delta _ { 1 } ) ^ { * } = ( \alpha * \delta _ { 2 } ) ^ { * }$ ,as desired.

It follows that $p : E  B$ is a covering map in the sense used in earlier chapters. To show it is acovering map in the sense used in this chapter, we must show E is path Connected. This we shall do shortly.

Step 5.Lufing a path in B. Let $_ { e _ { 0 } }$ denote the equivalence class of the constant path at bo; then $p ( e _ { 0 } ) = b _ { 0 }$ by definition. Given a path α in B beginning at $b _ { 0 }$ we calculate its lft to apath in E beginning at eo and show that this lift ends at $\alpha ^ { \# }$

To begin, given $c \in [ 0 , 1 ]$ ,let $\alpha _ { c } : I  B$ denote the path defined by the equation

$$
\alpha _ { c } ( t ) = \alpha ( t c ) \qquad \mathrm { f o r } \quad 0 \leq t \leq 1 .
$$

Then $\pmb { \alpha } _ { c }$ is the “portion” of α that runs from ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( 0 )$ to ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( c )$ . In particular, $\pmb { \alpha _ { 0 } }$ is the constant path at $b _ { 0 }$ and ${ \pmb { \alpha } } _ { \bf l }$ is the path α itself.We define ${ \tilde { \alpha } } : I  E$ by the equation

$$
\bar { \alpha } ( c ) = { ( \alpha _ { c } ) } ^ { \# }
$$

and show that $\bar { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is continuous.Then $\pmb { \bar { \alpha } }$ is a lift of α,since $p ( \bar { \alpha } ( c ) ) = \alpha _ { c } ( 1 ) = \alpha ( c )$ furthermore, $\tilde { \pmb { \alpha } }$ begins at $( \alpha _ { 0 } ) ^ { \# } = e _ { 0 }$ and ends at $( \alpha _ { 1 } ) ^ { \# } = \alpha ^ { \# }$

To venfy continuity, we introduce the following notation. Given $0 \leq c < d \leq 1$ let $\delta _ { c , d }$ denote the path that equals the positive linear map of I onto [c,d] followed byα．Note that the paths $\alpha _ { d }$ and $\alpha _ { c } * \delta _ { c , d }$ are path homotopic because one is just a reparametrization of the other. See Figure 82.2.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 82.2

We now verfy continuity of $\pmb { \tilde { \alpha } }$ at the point c of [O,1].Let W be a basis element in E about the point $\pmb { \tilde { \alpha } } ( c )$ . Then W equals $B ( U , \alpha _ { c } )$ for some path-connected neighborhood $\boldsymbol { U }$ of ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ( c )$ . Choose $\epsilon > 0$ so that for $| c - t | < \epsilon$ ,the point α(t) lies in U. We show that if d is a point of [O,1] with $| c - d | < \epsilon$ ,then $\bar { \alpha } ( d ) \in W$ ：this proves continuity of $\pmb { \tilde { \alpha } }$ at c.

So suppose $| c - d | < \epsilon$ .Take first the case where $d > c$ Set $\delta = \delta _ { c , d }$ ：then since $[ \alpha _ { d } ] = [ \alpha _ { c } * \delta ]$ ,we have

$$
\bar { \alpha } ( d ) = ( \alpha _ { d } ) ^ { \# } = ( \alpha _ { c } * \delta ) ^ { \# } .
$$

Since & les in $U .$ we have $\bar { \alpha } ( d ) \in B ( U , \alpha _ { c } )$ ,as desired. If $\textbf { \em d } < \boldsymbol { c } .$ set $\delta = \delta _ { d , c }$ and proceed similarly.

Step 6. The map $p : E \to B$ is a covering map.We need only venfy that E is path connected,and this is easy. For if $\alpha ^ { \# }$ is any point of E,then the lift $\bar { \pmb { \alpha } }$ of the path α is a path in E from ${ e _ { 0 } }$ to $\alpha ^ { \sharp }$

Step 7. Finally, $H = p _ { * } ( \pi _ { 1 } ( E , e _ { 0 } )$ . Let α be a loop in B at bo. Let $\pmb { \tilde { \alpha } }$ be its lift to E beginning at ${ \pmb e _ { 0 } }$ Theorem 54.6 tellsus that $[ \alpha ] \in p _ { * } ( \pi _ { 1 } ( E , e _ { 0 } ) )$ if and only if is a loop in E.Now the final point of ＆ is the point $\alpha ^ { \# }$ ,and ${ \pmb { \alpha } } ^ { \# } = e _ { 0 }$ if and only if α is equivalent to the constant path at bo,i.e.,if and only if $[ \alpha \ast \bar { e } _ { b _ { 0 } } ] \in H$ This occurs precisely when $[ \alpha ] \in H$ □

Corollary 82.2.The space B has a universal covering space if and only if B is path connected, locally path connected,and semilocally simply connected.

## Exercises

1. Show that a simply connected space is semulocally simply connected.

2.Let X be the infinite earring in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ (See Example l of \$80.) Let C(X) be the subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ that is the union of alline segments joining points of $X \times 0$ to the point $\boldsymbol { p } = ( 0 , 0 , 1 )$ . It is called the cone on X. Show that $C ( { \pmb X } )$ is simply connected,but is not locally simply connected at the origin.

## \*Supplementary Exercises: Topological Properties and $\pmb { \pi _ { 1 } }$

The results of the preceding section tell us that the appropriate hypotheses for classifying the covering spaces of B are that B is path connected,locally path connected, and semilocally simply connected. We now show that they are also the correct hypotheses for studying the relation between various topological properties of B and the fundamental group of B.

1.Let X be a space; let .A be an open covering of X. Under what conditions does there exist an open covering B of X refining A such that for each pair $B , \ B ^ { \prime }$ of elements of B that have nonempty intersection,the union $\pmb { { \cal B } } \cup \pmb { { \cal B } } ^ { \prime }$ lies in an element of A?

(a)Show that such a covering B exists if X is metrizable.[Hint: Choose $\epsilon ( x )$ S0 $B ( x , 3 \epsilon ( x ) )$ lies in an element of A. Let B consist of the open sets $B ( x , \epsilon ( x ) ) . ]$

(b） Show that such a covering exists if X is compact Hausdorff.[Hint: Let $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n }$ be a finite subcollection_of A that covers X. Choose an open covering $C _ { 1 } , \ldots , C _ { n }$ of X such that ${ \bar { C } } _ { i } \subset A _ { i }$ for each i. For each nonempty subset Jof $\{ 1 , \ldots , n \}$ ,consider the set

$$
B _ { J } = \bigcap _ { j \in J } A _ { j } - \bigcup _ { j \notin J } { \bar { C } } _ { j } . ]
$$

## 2.Prove the following:

Theorem.Let X be a space that is path connected, locally path connected, and semilocally simply connected.If X is regular with a countable basis,then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is countable.

Proof. Let A be a covering of X by path-connected open sets A such that for each $A \in { \mathcal { A } }$ and each ${ \pmb { a } } \in { \pmb { A } }$ ,the homomorphism $\pi _ { 1 } ( A , a ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ induced by inclusion is trivial. Let B be a countable open covering of X by nonempty path-connected sets that satisfies the conditions of Exercise 1. Choose a point $p ( B ) \in B$ for each $B \in \mathcal { B }$ For each pair $B , B ^ { \prime }$ of elements of B for which $B \cap B ^ { \prime } \neq \emptyset$ ,choose a path $g ( B , B ^ { \prime } )$ in $\pmb { B } \cup \pmb { B } ^ { \prime }$ from $p ( B )$ to $p ( B ^ { \prime } )$ . We call the path $g ( B , B ^ { \prime } )$ a select path.

Let ${ \pmb B } _ { 0 }$ be a fixed element of ${ \mathcal { B } } ;$ let $\boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } = \boldsymbol { p } ( \boldsymbol { B } _ { 0 } )$ . Show that if f is a loop in X based at xo,then f is path homotopic to a product of select paths,as follows: (a） Show that there is a subdivision

$$
0 = t _ { 0 } < \cdots < t _ { n } = 1
$$

of [0,1] such that f maps $\left[ t _ { n - 1 } , t _ { n } \right]$ into $\pmb { B } _ { 0 }$ 、and for each $i = 1 , \ldots , n - 1$ fmaps $[ t _ { i - 1 } , t _ { i } ]$ into an element $\pmb { B _ { i } }$ of B.Set $B _ { n } = B _ { 0 }$

(b) Let $f _ { i }$ be the positive linear map of [O,l] onto $[ t _ { i - 1 } , t _ { i } ]$ followed by f. Let $g _ { i } = g ( B _ { i - 1 } , B _ { i } )$ . Choose a path ${ \pmb { \alpha } } _ { i }$ in $\pmb { B _ { i } }$ from $f ( t _ { i } )$ to $p ( B _ { i } ) ; \mathsf { i f } \mathsf { i } = 0$ or n, let ${ \pmb { \alpha } } _ { i }$ be the constant path at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ Show that

$$
[ f _ { i } ] \ast [ \alpha _ { i } ] = [ \alpha _ { i - 1 } ] \ast [ g _ { i } ] .
$$

(c） Show that $[ f ] = [ g _ { 1 } ] \ast \cdot \cdot \cdot \ast [ g _ { n } ]$

3. Let $p : E \to X$ be a covering map such that $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is countable. Show that if X is regular with a countable basis,so is E.[Hint:Let B be a countable basis for X consisting of path-connected sets Let C be the collection of path components of $p ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ ,for $B \in { \mathcal { B } }$ .Compare Exercise 6 of \$53.1

4. Prove the following:

Theorem.Let X be a space that is path connected, locally path connected, and semilocally simply connected.If X is compact Hausdorff,then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is finitely generated,and hence countable.

Proof. Repeat the proof outlined in Exercise 2,choosing B to be finite.One has the equation

$$
[ f ] = [ g _ { 1 } ] \ast \cdot \cdot \cdot \ast . [ g _ { n } ] ,
$$

as before.Choose,for each $x \in X$ ,a path $\beta _ { x }$ from xo to x; let $\beta _ { x _ { 0 } }$ be the constant path. If $g = g ( \pmb { \cal { B } } , \pmb { \cal { B } } ^ { \prime } )$ ,define

$$
L ( g ) = \beta _ { x } * ( g * \bar { \beta } _ { y } ) ,
$$

where $x = p ( B )$ and $y = p ( B ^ { \prime } )$ . Show that

$$
[ f ] = [ L ( g _ { 1 } ) ] * \cdot \cdot \cdot * [ L ( g _ { n } ) ] .
$$

5.Let X be the infinite earring (see Example l of \$8O). Show that X is a compact Hausdorff space with a countable basis whose fundamental group is uncountable. [Hint: Let $r _ { n } : X \to C _ { n }$ be a retraction. Given a sequence $a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , \ldots$ of zeros and ones,show there exists a loop f in X such that,for each n,the element $( r _ { n } ) _ { * } [ f ]$ is trivial if and only if $a _ { n } = 0 . ]$