Proof.This is the most elaborate proof of this section; three cuttings and pastings are involved.We show first that,switching labels and exponents if necessary,w can be written in the form

$$
w = w _ { 0 } [ y _ { 1 } ] a [ y _ { 1 } ] b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 4 } ] b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 5 } ] ,\tag{*}
$$

where some of the $y _ { i }$ may be empty.

Among the labels appearing in ${ \pmb w } _ { \parallel }$ ,let a be one whose two occurrences (with opposite exponents of course） are as close together as possible. These occurrences are nonadjacent,by hypothesis.Switching exponents if necessary, we can assume that the term a occurs first and the term $a ^ { - 1 }$ occurs second. Let b be any label appearing between a and $a ^ { - 1 }$ ； we can assume its exponent is +l. Now the term $\pmb { b } ^ { - 1 }$ appears in ${ \pmb w } _ { \parallel }$ ,but cannot occur between a and $a ^ { - 1 }$ because these two are as close together as possible. If $b ^ { - 1 }$ appears following $a ^ { - 1 }$ , we are finished. If it appears preceding a,then all we need to do is to switch exponents on the b terms,and then switch the labels a and b,to obtain a scheme of the desired form.

So let us assume that w has the form (\*).

First cutting and pasting.We show that w is equivalent to the scheme

$$
{ w ^ { \prime } = w _ { 0 } a [ y _ { 2 } ] b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } ] b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 5 } ] } .
$$

To prove this result, we rewrite w in the form

$$
\begin{array} { r } { { \pmb w } = w _ { 0 } [ y _ { 1 } ] a [ y _ { 2 } b y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 4 } b ^ { - 1 } y _ { 5 } ] . } \end{array}
$$

We then apply the cuting and pasting argument indicated in Figure 77.3 to conclude that

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { w \sim w _ { 0 } c [ y _ { 2 } b y _ { 3 } ] c ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } b ^ { - 1 } y _ { 5 } ] } } \\ { { { } } } \\ { { \sim w _ { 0 } a [ y _ { 2 } ] b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } ] b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 5 } ] , } } \end{array}
$$

by relabelling. Note that the cut at c can be made because both the resulting polygons have at least three sides.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 77.3

Second cutting and pasting. Given

$$
{ \pmb w } ^ { \prime } = { w _ { 0 } a [ y _ { 2 } ] { b [ y _ { 3 } ] } { a ^ { - 1 } } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } ] { b ^ { - 1 } } [ y _ { 5 } ] } ,
$$

we show that $\pmb { w } ^ { \prime }$ is equivalent to the scheme

$$
{ w ^ { \prime \prime } = w _ { 0 } a \{ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } \} b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] . }
$$

If all the schemes $y _ { 1 } , y _ { 4 } , y _ { 5 }$ ,and ${ \pmb w } _ { \mathbf 0 }$ are empty, then the argument is easy,since in that case

$$
{ \begin{array} { r l } { w ^ { \prime } = a [ y _ { 2 } ] b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } , } \\ { \sim b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } a [ y _ { 2 } ] \ } & { { \mathrm { b y ~ p e r m u t i n g } } } \\ { \sim a [ y _ { 3 } ] b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 2 } ] \ } & { { \mathrm { b y ~ r e l a b e l l i n g } } } \\ { = w ^ { \prime \prime } . } \end{array} }
$$

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Figure 77.4

Otherwise, we apply the argument indicated in Figure 77.4 to conclude that

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { w ^ { \prime } = w _ { 0 } a [ y _ { 2 } ] b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } ] b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 5 } ] } } \\ { { { } } } \\ { { \sim w _ { 0 } c [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } c ^ { - 1 } a [ y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] } } \\ { { { } } } \\ { { \sim w _ { 0 } a [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } ] b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] , } } \end{array}
$$

by relabelling.

Third cutting and pasting. We complete the proof.Given

$$
\pmb { w } ^ { \prime \prime } = \pmb { w } _ { 0 } a \{ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } \} b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] ,
$$

we show that $w ^ { \prime \prime }$ is equivalent to the scheme

$$
w ^ { \prime \prime \prime } = w _ { 0 } a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } \{ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } \} .
$$

If the schemes wo, ys,and $y _ { 2 }$ are empty, the argument is easy,since in that case

$$
{ \begin{array} { r l r } { w ^ { \prime \prime } = a [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } ] b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } } \\ { } \\ { \sim b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } a [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } ] } & { { \mathrm { ~ b y ~ p e r m u t i n g ~ } } } \\ { \sim a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } ] } & { { \mathrm { ~ b y ~ r e l a b e l l i n g ~ } } } \end{array} }
$$

Otherwise,we apply the argument indicated in Figure 77.5 to conclude that

$$
\begin{array} { c } { { w ^ { \prime \prime } = w _ { 0 } a [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } ] b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] } } \\ { { { } } } \\ { { \sim w _ { 0 } c a ^ { - 1 } c ^ { - 1 } a [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] } } \\ { { { } } } \\ { { { } \sim w _ { 0 } a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] , } } \end{array}
$$

by relabelling,as desired.

<!-- image-->

The final step of our classification procedure involves showing that a connected sum of projective planes and tori is equivalent to a connected sum of projective planes alone.

Lemma 77.4. Let w be a proper scheme of the form

$$
\pmb { w } = \pmb { w _ { 0 } } ( c c ) ( a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } ) \pmb { w _ { 1 } } .
$$

Then w is equivalent to the scheme

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \pmb { w } ^ { \prime } = \pmb { w } _ { 0 } ( a a b b c c ) \pmb { w } _ { 1 } . } \end{array}
$$

Proof.Recall Lemma 77.1, which states that for proper schemes we have

$$
[ y _ { 0 } ] a [ y _ { 1 } ] a [ y _ { 2 } ] \sim a a [ y _ { 0 } y _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } y _ { 2 } ] .\tag{*}
$$

We proceed as follows:

$$
{ \begin{array} { r l r l } & { w \sim ( c c ) ( a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } ) w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } } & & { \qquad { \mathrm { b y ~ p e r m u t i n g } } } \\ & { = c [ a b ] [ b a ] ^ { - 1 } [ w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } ] } \\ & { \sim [ a b ] c [ b a ] c [ w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } ] } & & { \qquad { \mathrm { b y ~ ( * ) ~ r e a d ~ b a c k w a r d s } } } \\ & { = [ a ] b [ c ] b [ a c w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } ] } \\ & { \sim b b [ a c ^ { - 1 } a c w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } ] } & & { \qquad { \mathrm { b y ~ ( * ) } } } \\ & { = [ b b ] a [ c ] ^ { - 1 } a [ c w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } ] } \\ & { \sim a a [ b b c c w _ { 1 } w _ { 0 } ] } & & { \qquad { \mathrm { b y ~ ( * ) } } } \\ & { \sim w _ { 0 } a a b b c c w _ { 1 } } & & { \qquad { \mathrm { b y ~ p e r m u t i n g . } } } \end{array} }
$$

Theorem 77.5 (The classification theorem). Let X be the quotient space obtained from a polygonal region in the plane by pasting its edges together in pairs. Then X is homeomorphic either to $s ^ { 2 }$ ,to the n-fold torus $T _ { n }$ ,or to the m-fold projective plane $\pmb { P _ { m } }$

Proof.Let w be the labelling scheme by which one forms the space X from the polygonal region P. Then w is a proper scheme of length least 4.We show that w is equivalent to one of the following schemes:

(1) $a a ^ { - 1 } b b ^ { - 1 }$

(2) abab,

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } & { ( 3 ) } & { ( a _ { 1 } a _ { 1 } ) ( a _ { 2 } a _ { 2 } ) \cdots ( a _ { m } a _ { m } ) \quad \mathrm { ~ w i t h ~ } m \geq 2 , } \\ & { ( 4 ) } & { ( a _ { 1 } b _ { 1 } a _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } b _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } ) ( a _ { 2 } b _ { 2 } a _ { 2 } ^ { - 1 } b _ { 2 } ^ { - 1 } ) \cdots ( a _ { n } b _ { n } a _ { n } ^ { - 1 } b _ { n } ^ { - 1 } ) \quad \mathrm { ~ w i t h ~ } n \geq 1 . } \end{array}
$$

The first scheme gives rise to the space $s ^ { 2 }$ ,and the second,to the space $P ^ { 2 }$ ,as we noted in Examples 2 and 4 of \$74. The third leads to the space $\pmb { P _ { m } }$ and the fourth to the space $T _ { n }$

Step 1.Let w be a proper scheme of torus type.We show that w is equivalent either to scheme (l) or to a scheme of type (4).

It w has length four,then it can be written in one of the forms

$$
a a ^ { - 1 } b b ^ { - 1 } \quad \mathrm { ~ o r ~ } \quad a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } .
$$

The first is of type (l)and the second of type (4).

We proceed by induction on the length of w． Assume w has length greater than four. If w is equivalent to a shorter scheme of torus type,then the induction hypothesis applies. Otherwise,we know that w contains no pair of adjacent terms having the same label. We apply Lemma 77.3 (with wo empty) to conclude that w is equivalent to a scheme having the same length as w,of the form

$$
a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } w _ { 3 } ,
$$

where ${ \pmb w } _ { 3 }$ is of torus type. Note that w3 is not empty because w has length greater than four. Again,w3 cannot contain two adjacent terms having the same label, since

w is not equivalent to a shorter scheme of torus type.Applying the lemma again,with $w _ { 0 } = a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 }$ ,we conclude that w is equivalent to a scheme of the form

$$
( a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } ) ( c d c ^ { - 1 } d ^ { - 1 } ) w _ { 4 } ,
$$

where ${ \pmb w } _ { \pmb q }$ is empty or of torus type. If ${ \pmb w } _ { 4 }$ is empty,we are finished; otherwise we apply the lemma again. Continue similarly.

Step 2. Now let w be a proper scheme of projective type.We show that w is equivalent either to scheme (2) or to a scheme of type (3).

If w has length four, Corollary 77.2 implies that w is equivalent to one of the schemes aabb or $a a b ^ { - 1 } b$ .The first is of type (3）The second can be written in the form $a a y _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } y _ { 2 }$ ,with $y _ { 1 } = y _ { 2 } = b ; $ then Lemma 77.1 implies that it is equivalent to the scheme $a y _ { 1 } a y _ { 2 } = a b a b$ ,which is of type (2).

We proceed by induction on the length of w.Assume w has length greater than four. Corollary 77.2 tells us that w is equivalent to a scheme of the form

$$
{ \pmb w } ^ { \prime } = ( a _ { 1 } a _ { 1 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot ( a _ { k } a _ { k } ) { \pmb w } _ { 1 } ,
$$

where $k \geq 1$ and ${ \pmb w } _ { 1 }$ is of torus type or empty. If ${ \pmb w } _ { 1 }$ is empty, we are finished. If ${ \pmb w } _ { 1 }$ has two adjacent terms having the same label,then $\pmb { w } ^ { \prime }$ is equivalent to a shorter scheme of projective type and the induction hypothesis applies.Otherwise,Lemma 77.3 tells us that $\pmb { w } ^ { \prime }$ is equivalent to a scheme of the form

$$
{ \pmb w } ^ { \prime \prime } = ( a _ { 1 } a _ { 1 } ) \cdots ( a _ { k } a _ { k } ) a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } { \pmb w } _ { 2 } ,
$$

where ${ \pmb w } _ { 2 }$ is either empty or of torus type. Then we apply Lemma 77.4 to conclude that ${ \pmb w } ^ { \prime \prime }$ is equivalent to the scheme

$$
( a _ { 1 } a _ { 1 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot ( a _ { k } a _ { k } ) a a b b w _ { 2 } .
$$

We continue simularly. Eventually we reach a scheme of type (3).

## Exercises

1. Let X be a space obtained by pasting the edges of a polygonal region together in pairs.

(a） Show that X is homeomorphic to exactly one of the spaces in the following list: $S ^ { 2 } , P ^ { 2 } , K , T _ { n } , T _ { n } \# P ^ { 2 } , T _ { n } \# K$ ,whereKis the Klein bottle and $n \geq 1$

(b） Show that X is homeomorphic to exactly one of the spaces in the following list: $S ^ { 2 } , T _ { n } , P ^ { 2 } , K _ { m } , P ^ { 2 } \# K _ { m }$ ,where $K _ { m }$ is the m-fold connected sum of K with itself and $m \geq 1$

2.(a)Write down the sequence of elementary operations required to carry out the arguments indicated in Figures 77.l and 77.2.

(b) Write down the sequence of elementary operations required to carry out the arguments indicated in Figures 77.3,77.4,and 77.5.

3. The proof of te clasification theorem provides an algorithm for taking a proper labelling scheme for a polygonal region and reducing it to one of the four standard forms indicated in the theorem. The appropriate equivalences are the following:

(i）[yo $\ln a [ y _ { 1 } ] a [ y _ { 2 } ] \sim a a [ y _ { 0 } y _ { 1 } ^ { - 1 } y _ { 2 } ]$

(ii) $[ y _ { 0 } ] a a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } ] \sim [ y _ { 0 } y _ { 1 } ]$ if yoyi has length at least 4.

(iii) $w _ { 0 } [ y _ { 1 } ] a [ y _ { 2 } ] b [ y _ { 3 } ] a ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 4 } ] b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 5 } ] \sim w _ { 0 } a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } [ y _ { 1 } y _ { 4 } y _ { 3 } y _ { 2 } y _ { 5 } ] ,$

(iv) $w _ { 0 } ( c c ) ( a b a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } ) w _ { 1 } \sim$ woaabbccw1.

Using this algorithm,reduce each of the following schemes to one of the standard forms.

(a) $a b a c b ^ { - 1 } c ^ { - 1 }$

(b) $a b c a ^ { - 1 } c b .$

(c） $a b b c a ^ { - 1 } d d c ^ { - 1 }$

(d) $a b c d a ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } c ^ { - 1 } d ^ { - 1 }$

(e) $a b c d a ^ { - 1 } c ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } d ^ { - 1 }$

(f） $a a b c d c ^ { - 1 } b ^ { - 1 } d ^ { - 1 }$

(g)abcdabdc.

(h) abcdabcd.

4.Let w be a proper labelling scheme for a lO-sided polygonal region. If w is of projective type,which of the list of spaces in Theorem 77.5 can it represent? What if w is of torus type?

## \$78 Constructing Compact Surfaces

To complete our classification of the compact surfaces,we must show that every compact connected surface can be obtained by pasting together in pairs the edges of a polygonal region. We shall actually prove something slightly weaker than this,for we shall assume that the surface in question has what is called a triangulation.We define this notion as follows:

Definition. Let X be a compact Hausdorff space.A curved triangle in X is a subspace A of X and a homeomorphism $h : T \to A$ ，where T isa closed triangular region in the plane.If e is an edge of T,then h(e) is is said to be an edge of A; if v is a vertex of T,then $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { v } )$ is said to be a vertex of A. A triangulation of X is a collection of curved triangles $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n }$ in X whose union is X such that for $i \neq j$ the intersection $A _ { i } \cap A _ { j }$ is either empty,or a vertex of both $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ and $A _ { j }$ ,or ari edge of both．Furthermore,if $h _ { i } : T _ { i }  A _ { i }$ is the homeomorphism associated with $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ we require that when $A _ { i } \cap A _ { j }$ is an edgee of both,then the map $\pmb { h } _ { i } ^ { - 1 } \pmb { h } _ { i }$ definesa linear homeomorphism of the edge $h _ { \iota } ^ { - 1 } ( e )$ of $T _ { i }$ with the edge $h _ { j } ^ { - 1 } ( e )$ of $T _ { j }$ . If X has a triangulation, it is said to be triangulable.

It is a basic theorem that every compact surface is triangulable. The proof is long but not exceedingly difficult. (See [A-S] or [D-M].)

Theorem 78.1. If X is a compact triangulable surface,then X is homeomorphic to the quotient space obtained from a collection of disjoint triangular regions in the plane by pasting their edges together in pairs.

Proof. Let $A _ { 1 } , \ldots , A _ { n }$ bea triangulation of X,with corresponding homeomorphisms $h _ { i } : T _ { i }  A _ { i }$ . We assume the triangles $T _ { i }$ are disjoint;then the maps $\pmb { h } _ { i }$ combine to define a map $h : E = T _ { 1 } \cup \dots \cup T _ { n }  X$ that is automatically a quotient map. (E is compact and X is Hausdorf.） Furthermore,because the map $\pmb { h } _ { \iota } ^ { - 1 } \circ \pmb { h } _ { i }$ is linear whenever $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ and $A _ { j }$ intersect in an edge, h pastes the edges of $T _ { i }$ and $\boldsymbol { T } _ { j }$ together by a linear homeomorphism.

We have two things to prove.First, we must show that for each edge e of a triangle $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ ,there is exactly one other triangle $\pmb { A } _ { j }$ such that $A _ { i } \cap A _ { j } = e$ This will show that the quotient map h pastes the edges of the trangles $\pmb { T _ { i } }$ together in pairs.

The second is a bit less obvious.We must show that if the intersection $A _ { i } \cap A _ { j }$ equals a vertex v of each, then there is a sequence of triangles having v as a vertex, beginning with $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ and ending with $A _ { j }$ ,such that the intersection of each trangle of the sequence with its successor equals an edge of each. See Figure 78.1.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 78.1

If this were not the case,one might have a situation such as that pictured in Figure 78.2. Here,one cannot specify the quotient map h merely by specifying how the edges of the trangles $\pmb { T _ { i } }$ are to be pasted together, but one must also indicate how the vertices are to be identified when that identificaton is not forced by the pasting of edges.

Step 1.Let us tackle the second problem first. We show that because the space X is a surface,a situation such as that indicated in Figure 78.2 cannot occur.

Given v,let us define two triangles $\mathbf { A } _ { t }$ and $A _ { j }$ having v as a vertex to be equivalent if there is a sequence of triangles having v as a vertex,beginning with $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ and ending with $A _ { j }$ ,such that the intersection of each triangle with its successor is an edge of each. If there is more than one equivalence class,let B be the union of the triangles in one class and let C be the union of the others.The sets B and C intersect in v alone because no triangle in B has an edge in common with a triangle in C.We conclude that for every suffciently small neighborhood W of v in X,the space W-v is nonconnected.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 78.2

On the other hand,if X is a surface,then v has a neighborhood homeomorphic to an open 2-ball.In this case,v has arbitrarily small neighborhoods W such that W- v is connected.

Step 2 Now we tackle the first question.This is a bit more work.First,we show that,given an edge e of the triangle $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ ， there is at least one additional triangle $A _ { j }$ having e as an edge. This is a consequence of the following result:

If X is a triangular region in the plane and if x isa point interior to one of the edges of X, then x does not have a neighborhood in X homeomorphic to an open 2-ball.

To prove this fact,we note that x has arbitrarily small neighborhoods W for which W-x is simply connected. Indeed,if W is the ∈-neighborhood of x in X,for ∈ small, then it is easy to see that W- x is contractible to a point. See Figure 78.3.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 78.3

On the other hand,suppose there is a neighborhood U of x that is homeomorphic to an open ball in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ,with the homeomorphism carrying x to 0.We show that x does not have arbitrarily small neighborhoods W such that $W - x$ is simply connected.

Indeed,let Bbe the open unit ball in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ centered at the origin, and suppose V is any neighborhood of O that is contained in B. Choose ∈ so that the open ball $\pmb { B } _ { \epsilon }$ of radius ∈ centered at O lies in V,and consider the inclusion mappings

<!-- image-->

The inclusion i is homotopic to the homeomorphism $h ( x ) = x / \epsilon$ 、so it induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups.Therefore,k. is surjective; it follows that ${ \pmb { V } } - { \pmb { 0 } }$ cannot be simply connected. See Figure 78.4.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 78.4

Step 3.Now we show that given an edge e of the triangle $\mathbf { A } _ { t }$ , there is no more than one additional triangle $A _ { j }$ having e as an edge. This is a consequence of the following result:

Let X be the union ofk triangles in ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$ ,each pair of which intersect in the common edge e. Let x be an interior point ofe. $H k \geq 3$ ,thenxdoesnot havea neighborhood in X homeomorphic to an open 2-ball.

We show that there is no neighborhood W of x in X such that W- x has abelian fundamental group.It follows that no neighborhood of x is homeomorphic to an open 2-ball.

To begin,we show that if A is the union of all the edges of the triangles of X that are different frome,then the fundamental group of A is not abelian. The space A is the union of a collection of k arcs,each pair of which intersect in their end points. If B is the union of three of the arcs that make up A,then there is a retraction r of A onto B,obtained by mapping each of the arcs not in B homeomorphically onto one of the arcs in B,keeping the end points fixed. Then $\pmb { r } _ { \ast }$ is an epimorphism. Since the fundamental group of B is not abelian (by Example 1 of \$7O or Example 3 of \$58), neither is the fundamental group of A.

It follows that the fundamental group of $\pmb { \chi } - \pmb { x }$ is not abelian,for it is easy to see that A isa deformation retract of $\pmb { X } - \pmb { x }$ See Figure 78.5.

Now we prove our result. For convenience,assume x is the origin in ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$ . If W is an arbitrary neighborhood of O,we can find a“shrinking map" $f ( x ) = \epsilon x$ that carries X into W. The space $\ b X _ { \epsilon } = \ b f ( \ b X )$ is acopy of X lying inside W.Consider the inclusions

<!-- image-->  
Figure 78.5

<!-- image-->

The inclusion i is homotopic to the homeomorphism $h ( x ) = x / \epsilon$ ,so it induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups.It follows that ${ \pmb k } _ { \ast }$ is surjective,so the fundamental group of ${ \pmb W } - { \pmb 0 }$ cannot be abelian. □

Theorem 78.2. If X is a compact connected triangulable surface,then X is homeomorphic to a space obtained from a polygonal region in the plane by pasting the edges together in pairs.

Proof.It follows from the preceding theorem that there is a collection $T _ { 1 } , \dots , T _ { n }$ of triangular regions in the plane,and orientations and a labelling of the edges of these regions,where each label appears exactly twice in the total labelling scheme,such that X is homeomorphic to the quotient space obtained from these regions by means of this labelling scheme.

We apply the pasting operation of \$76. If two triangular regions have edges bearing the same label,we can (after flipping one of the regions if necessary） paste the regions together along these two edges.The result is to replace the two triangular regions by a single four-sided polygonal region,whose edges still bear orientations and labels.We continue similarly. As long as we have two regions having edges bearing the same label, the process can be continued.

Eventually one reaches the situation where either one has a single poly gonal region,in which case the theorem is proved, or one has several polygonal regions,no two of which have edges bearing the same label. In such a case,the space formed by carrying out the indicated pasting of edges is not connected; in fact,each of the regions gives rise to a component of this space. Since the space X is connected,this situation cannot occur.

## Exercises

1.What space is indicated by each of the following labelling schemes for a collection of four triangular regions?

(a) $a b c , d a e , b e f , c d f .$

(b) $a b c , c b a , d e f , d f e ^ { - 1 }$

2. Let $H ^ { 2 }$ be the subspace of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ consisting of all points $( x _ { 1 } , x _ { 2 } )$ with $x _ { 2 } \geq 0$ A2- manifold with boundary (or surfacewith boundary) isa Hausdorff space X with a countable basis such that each point x of X has a neighborhood homeomorphic with an open set of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ or $H ^ { 2 }$ . The boundary of X(denoted a X） consists of those points x such that x has no neighborhood homeomorphic with an open set of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

(a） Show that no point of $H ^ { 2 }$ of the form $( x _ { 1 } , 0 )$ has a neighborhood (in $H ^ { 2 } )$ that is homeomorphic to an open set of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

(b) Show that $\pmb { x } \in \partial { \pmb { X } }$ if and only if there is a homeomorphism h mapping a neighborhood of x onto an open set of $H ^ { 2 }$ such that $\pmb { h } ( \pmb { x } ) \in \mathbb { R } \times \pmb { 0 } .$

(c） Show that aX is a 1-manifold.

3. Show that the closed unit ball in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ is a 2-manifold with boundary.

4.Let X be a 2-manifold; let $U _ { 1 } , \dots , U _ { k }$ be a collection of disjoint open sets in X;and suppose that for each i, there is a homeomorphism $\pmb { h } _ { i }$ of the open unit ball $B ^ { 2 }$ with $U _ { i }$ . Let $\epsilon = 1 / 2$ and let $B _ { \epsilon }$ be the open ball of radius ∈. Show that the space $Y = X - \bigcup h _ { \iota } ( B _ { \epsilon } )$ is a 2-manifold with boundary,and that aY has k components. The space Y is called“X-with-k-holes."

5.Prove the following:

Theorem． Given a compact connected triangulable 2-manifold Y with boundary,such that aY has k components,thenY is homeomorphic to X-with-k-holes, where X is either $\textstyle s ^ { 2 }$ or the n-fold torus $T _ { n }$ or the m-fold projective plane $\boldsymbol { P _ { m } }$

[Hint: Each component of aY is homeomorphic to a circle.]