Thus,for every pair of elements of $P _ { n + 1 }$ ,relation (\*) holds.

By induction, we have $U _ { p }$ defined for all $p \in { \cal P }$

To illustrate,let us suppose we started with the standard way of arranging the elements of $\pmb { P }$ in an infinite sequence

$$
P = \{ 1 , 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } , \frac { 1 } { 3 } , \frac { 2 } { 3 } , \frac { 1 } { 4 } , \frac { 3 } { 4 } , \frac { 1 } { 5 } , \frac { 2 } { 5 } , \frac { 3 } { 5 } , \frac { 1 } { 5 } \} ,
$$

After defining $U _ { \mathbf { 0 } }$ and $U _ { 1 }$ ,we would define $U _ { 1 / 2 }$ so that $\bar { U } _ { 0 } \subset U _ { 1 / 2 }$ and $\bar { U } _ { 1 / 2 } \subset U _ { 1 }$ Then we would fit in $U _ { 1 / 3 }$ between $U _ { \mathbf { 0 } }$ and $U _ { 1 / 2 }$ ,and $U _ { 2 / 3 }$ between $U _ { 1 / 2 }$ and $U _ { 1 }$ . And so on. At the eighth step of the proof we would have the situation pictured in Figure 33 1 And the ninth step would consist of choosing an open set $U _ { 2 / 5 }$ to fit in between $U _ { 1 / 3 }$ and $U _ { 1 / 2 }$ And so on

<!-- image-->  
Figure 33.1

Step 2.Now we have defined $U _ { p }$ for all rational numbers p in the interval {0,1]. We extend this definition to all rational numbers $p$ $\mathbb { R }$ by defining

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { U _ { p } = \emptyset } } & { { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } p < 0 , } } \\ { { U _ { p } = X } } & { { \mathrm { ~ i f ~ } p > 1 } } \end{array}
$$

It is still true (as you can check)that for any pair of rational numbers p and $\pmb q$

$$
p < q \Longrightarrow \bar { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { q }
$$

Step 3.Given a point x of X,let us define $\mathbb { Q } ( x )$ to be the set of those rational numbers $p$ such that the corresponding open sets $U _ { p }$ contain x

$$
\mathbb { Q } ( x ) = \{ p \mid x \in U _ { p } \} .
$$

This set contains no number less than O, since no x is in $U _ { p }$ for $p < 0$ And it contains every number greater than l,since every x is in $U _ { p }$ for $p > 1$ . Therefore, $\mathbb { Q } ( x )$ is bounded below,and its greatest lower bound is a point of the interval [O,1]. Define

$$
f ( x ) = \operatorname* { i n f } \mathbb { Q } ( x ) = \operatorname* { i n f } \{ p \mid x \in U _ { p } \} .
$$

Step 4 We show that f is the desired function. $\mathbb { I f } \ x \ \in \ A$ then $\pmb { \mathscr { x } } \in U _ { p }$ for every $p \geq 0$ so that $\mathbb { Q } ( x )$ equals the set of all nonnegative rationals,and $f ( x ) = \operatorname { i n f } \mathbb { Q } ( x ) =$ 0. Similarly, if $\pmb { x } \in \pmb { B }$ ,then ${ \pmb x } \in U _ { p }$ for no $p \leq 1$ ,so that $\mathbb { Q } ( x )$ consists of all rational numbers greater than l,and $f ( x ) = 1$

All this is easy. The only hard part is to show that f is continuous．For this purpose,we first prove the following elementary facts:

(1) $x \in \bar { U } _ { r } \Rightarrow f ( x ) \leq r$

(2) $x \notin U _ { r } \Rightarrow f ( x ) \geq r .$

To prove (1),note that if ${ \pmb x } \in \bar { U } _ { r }$ ，then $\textbf { \textit { x } } \in \textit { U } _ { s }$ for every $s \ > \ r$ Therefore,Q(x) contains all rational numbers greater than r,so that by definition we have

$$
f ( x ) = \mathsf { m f } \mathbb { Q } ( x ) \leq r
$$

To prove (2), note that if $x \notin U _ { r }$ ,then x is not in $U _ { s }$ for any $s \ < \ r$ Therefore, Q(x) contains no rational numbers less than r,so that

$$
f ( x ) = \operatorname { i n f } \mathbb { Q } ( x ) \geq r .
$$

Now we prove continuity of f. Given a point xo of X and an open interval $( c , d )$ in R containing the point $f ( x _ { 0 } )$ ，we wish to find a neighborhood U of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ such that $f ( U ) \subset ( c , d )$ .Choose rational numbers pandq such that

$$
c < p < f ( x _ { 0 } ) < q < d .
$$

We assert that the open set

$$
U = U _ { q } - \bar { U } _ { p }
$$

is the desired neighborhood of xo. See Figure 33.2.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 33.2

First,we note that $x _ { 0 } \in U$ For the fact that $f ( x _ { 0 } ) < q$ implies by condition (2) that $\pmb { x _ { 0 } \in U _ { q } }$ ,while the fact that $f ( x _ { 0 } ) > p$ implies by (1) that ${ \pmb x } _ { 0 } \not \in \bar { U } _ { p }$

Second,we show that $f ( U ) \subset ( c , d )$ Let $\textbf { \textit { x } } \in \textbf { \textit { U } }$ .Then $x \in U _ { q } \subset \bar { U } _ { q }$ ，SO that $f ( x ) \leq q$ ,by (l).And x $\notin \bar { U } _ { p }$ , so that $\textsf { \pmb { x } } \notin U _ { p }$ and $f ( x ) \ge p , \mathsf { b y } ( 2 )$ .Thus, $f ( x ) \in \{ p , q \} \subset ( c , d )$ ,as desired. □

Definition.If A and B are two subsets of the topological space X,and if there is a continuous function $f \cdot X  [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $f ( A ) = \{ 0 \}$ and $f ( B ) = \{ 1 \}$ ,we say that A and B can be separated by a continuous function.

The Urysohn lemma says that if every pair of disjoint closed sets in X can be separated by disjoint open sets,then each such paircan be separated by a continuous function.The converse is trivial,for if $f : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ is the function,then $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ) )$ and $f ^ { - 1 } ( ( \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 1 ] )$ are disjoint open sets containing A and B,respectively

This fact leads to a question that may already have occurred to you. Why cannot the proof of the Urysohn lemma be generalized to show that in a regular space,where you can separate points from closed sets by disjoint open sets,you can also separate points from closed sets by continuous functions ?

At first glance,it seems that the proof of the Urysohn lemma should go through. You take a point a and a closed set B not containing a,and you begin the proof just as before by defining $U _ { 1 } = X - B$ and choosing $U _ { 0 }$ to be an open set about a whose closure is contained in $U _ { 1 }$ (using regularity of $x )$ .But at the very next step of the proof,you run into difficulty. Suppose that $\pmb { p }$ is the next rational number in the sequence after O and l． You want to find an open set $U _ { p }$ such that $\tilde { U } _ { 0 } \subset U _ { p }$ and $\tilde { U } _ { p } \subset U _ { 1 }$ .For this,regularity is not enough.

Requiring that one be able to separate a point from a closed set by a continuous function is,in fact,a stronger condition than requiring that one can separate them by disjoint open sets.We make this requirement into a new separation axiom:

Definition. A space X is completely regular if one-point sets are closed in X and if for each point xo and each closed set A not containing $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ ，there is a continuous function $f : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $f ( x _ { 0 } ) = 1$ and $f ( A ) = \{ 0 \}$

A normal space is completely regular,by the Urysohn lemma,and a completely regular space is regular,since given f,the sets $f ^ { - 1 } ( [ 0 , \frac { 1 } { 2 } ) )$ and $f ^ { - 1 } ( ( \frac { 1 } { 2 } , 1 ] )$ are dis-joint open sets about A and $\pmb { x } _ { 0 }$ ,respectively As a result,this new axiom fits in between regularity and normality in the list of separation axioms.Note that in the definition one could just as well require the function to map $\scriptstyle x _ { 0 }$ to O,and A to {1],for $g ( x ) = 1 - f ( x )$ satisfies this condition.But our definition is at times a bit more convenient.

In the early years of topology,the separation axioms,listed in order of increasing strength,were labelled $T _ { 1 } , T _ { 2 }$ (Hausdorff), $\tau _ { 3 }$ (regular), $T _ { 4 }$ (normal), and $\pmb { T 5 }$ (completely normal),respectively. The letter $\bf \ " \ w \bf \ " \ w$ comes from the German “Trennungsaxiom,"which means “separation axiom.”Later,when the notion of complete regularity was introduced, someone suggested facetiously that it should be called the $\therefore T - 3 \frac { 1 } { 2 }$ axiom,”since it lies between regularity and normality.This terminology is in fact sometimes used in the literature'

Unlike normality, this new separation axiom is nicely behaved with regard to subspaces and products:

Theorem 33.2.A subspace of a completely regular space is completely regular. A productof completely regular spaces is completelyregular.

Proof.Let X be completely regular; let Y be a subspace of X.Let xo be a point of Y, and let A be a closed set of Y disjoint from xo.Now $A = \bar { A } \cap \gamma$ ,where $\bar { A }$ denotes the closure of A in X. Therefore, $x _ { 0 } \not \in \bar { A }$ .Since X is completely regular,we can choose a continuous function $f : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $f ( x _ { 0 } ) = 1$ and $f ( \bar { A } ) = \{ 0 \}$ . The restriction of f to Y is the desired continuous function on Y.

Let $\pmb { X } = \prod \pmb { X } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ be a product of completely regular spaces. Let $\boldsymbol { \mathbf { b } } = ( b _ { \boldsymbol { \mathbf { \alpha } } } )$ be a point of X and let A bea closed set of X disjoint from b. Choose a basis element $\prod U _ { \alpha }$ containing b that does not intersect A; then $U _ { \alpha } = X _ { \alpha }$ except for finitely many α,say $\alpha = \alpha _ { 1 } , \ldots , \alpha _ { n }$ . Given $i = 1 , \ldots , n$ ,choose a continuous function

$$
f _ { i } : X _ { \alpha _ { i } } \to [ 0 , 1 ]
$$

such that $f _ { i } ( b _ { \alpha _ { i } } ) = 1$ and $f _ { i } ( X - U _ { \alpha _ { i } } ) = \{ 0 \}$ .Let $\phi _ { i } ( \mathbf { x } ) = f _ { i } ( \pi _ { \alpha _ { i } } ( \mathbf { x } ) )$ ; then $\phi _ { i }$ maps X continuously into R and vanishes outside $\pi _ { \alpha _ { i } } ^ { - 1 } ( U _ { \alpha _ { i } } )$ . The product

$$
f ( \mathbf { x } ) = \phi _ { 1 } ( \mathbf { x } ) \phi _ { 2 } ( \mathbf { x } ) \cdot \mathbf { \mu } \cdot \mathbf { \sigma } \phi _ { n } ( \mathbf { x } )
$$

is the desired continuous function on X,for it equals l at b and vanishes outside $\Pi U _ { \alpha }$

EXAMPLE1.The SpaCes $\mathbb { R } _ { \pmb { \ell } } ^ { 2 }$ and $\pmb { S } _ { \Omega } \times \bar { \pmb { S } } _ { \Omega }$ are complelely regular but not normal For they are products of spaces that are completely regular (in fact, normal).

A space that is regular but not completely regular is much harder to find．Most of the examples that have been constructed for this purpose are diffcult, and require considerable famuliarity with cardinal numbers.Fairly recently,however,John Thomas [T] has constructed a much more elementary example,which we outline in Exercise l1.

## Exercises

1. Examine the proof of the Urysohn lemma,and show that for given r,

$$
f ^ { - 1 } ( r ) = \bigcap _ { p > r } U _ { p } - \bigcup _ { q < r } U _ { q } ,
$$

p,q rational.

2. (a） Show that a connected normal space having more than one point is uncountable.

(b) Show that a connected regular space having more than one point is uncountable.† {Hint: Any countable space is Lindelof.]

3. Give a direct proof of the Urysohn lemma for a metric space $( X , d )$ by setting

$$
f ( x ) = { \frac { d ( x , A ) } { d ( x , A ) + d ( x , B ) } } .
$$

4.Recall that A is a $\because G _ { \delta }$ set"in X if A is the intersection of a countable collection of open sets of X.

Theorem.Let X be normal.There exists a continuous function $f : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $f ( x ) = 0$ for $x \in A$ and $f ( x ) > 0$ for $x \notin A$ ,if and only ifA isa closed $G _ { \delta }$ set in X.

A function satsfying the requirements of this theorem is said to vanish precisely on A.

## 5. Prove:

Theorem (Strong form of the Urysohn lemma). Let X be a normal space. There Is a continuous function $f : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $f ( x ) = 0$ for $x \in A$ 、and $f ( x ) = 1$ for $x \in B$ 3,and $0 < f ( x ) < 1$ otherwise,if and onlyif Aand Bare disjoint closed $G _ { \delta }$ sets in X.

6.A space X is said to be perfectly normal if X is normal and if every closed set in X is a $G _ { \delta }$ set in X.

(a) Show that every metrizable space is perfectly normal.

(b） Show that a perfectly normal space is completely normal. For thus reason the condition of perfect normality is sometimes called the $" T _ { 6 }$ axiom.” {Hint: Let A and B be separated sets in X.Choose continuous functions $f , g \colon$ $X  [ 0 , 1 ]$ that vanish precisely on $\bar { A }$ and $\bar { \pmb B } .$ ，respectively. Con sider the function $\pmb { f } - \pmb { g } . ]$

(c）There is a familiar space that is completely normal but not perfectly normal. What is $\mathbf { i } \mathbf { t } ^ { \mathcal { \prime } }$

7. Show that every locally compact Hausdorff space is completely regular.

8.Let X be completely regular,let A and B be disjoint closed subsets of X. Show that if A is compact,there is a continuous functon $f : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $f ( A ) = \{ 0 \}$ and $f ( B ) = \{ 1 \}$

9. Show that $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ in the box topology is completely regular. {Hint:Show that it suffices to consider the case where the box neighborhood $( - 1 , 1 ) ^ { J }$ is disjoint from A and the point is the orgin. Then use the fact that a function continuous in the uniform topology is also continuous in the box topology.l

## \*10.Prove the following:

Theorem.Every topological group is completely regular.

Proof. Let $V _ { 0 }$ be a neighborhood of the identity element e,in the topological group $_ { G }$ In general,choose $V _ { n }$ to be a neighborhood of e such that $V _ { n } \cdot V _ { n } \subset$ $V _ { n - 1 }$ . Consider the set of all dyadic ratonals $p ,$ that is,all rational numbers of the form $k / 2 ^ { n }$ ,with k and n integers.For each dyadic rational p in (O,1],define an open set $U ( { \pmb p } )$ inductively as follows: $U ( 1 ) = V _ { 0 }$ and $U ( \textstyle { \frac { 1 } { 2 } } ) = V _ { 1 }$ Given n, if $U ( k / 2 ^ { n } )$ is defined for $0 < k / 2 ^ { n } \leq 1$ ,define

$$
U ( 1 / 2 ^ { n + 1 } ) = V _ { n + 1 } ,
$$

$$
U ( ( 2 k + 1 ) / 2 ^ { n + 1 } ) = V _ { n + 1 } \cdot U ( k / 2 ^ { n } )
$$

for $0 < k < 2 ^ { n }$ .For $p \leq 0$ let $U ( p ) = \emptyset$ ,and for $p > 1$ ,let $U ( p ) = G$ . Show that

$$
V _ { n } ~ U ( k / 2 ^ { n } ) \subset U ( ( k + 1 ) / 2 ^ { n } )
$$

for all k and n.Proceed as in the Urysohn lemma.

This exercise is adapted from [M-Z],to which the reader is referred for further results on topological groups.

\*11. Define a set X as follows: For each even integer m, let $L _ { m }$ denote the line segment $m \times \left[ - 1 , 0 \right]$ in the plane.For each odd integer n and each integer $k \geq 2$ let $C _ { n , k }$ denote the union of the line segments $( n + 1 - 1 / k ) \times [ - 1 , 0 ]$ and $( n - 1 + 1 / k ) \times [ - 1 , 0 ]$ and the semicircle

$$
\left\{ x \times y \mid \left( x - n \right) ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } = \left( 1 - 1 / k \right) ^ { 2 } { \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } } y \geq 0 \right\}
$$

in the plane. Let ${ p } _ { n , k }$ denote the topmost point $n \times ( 1 - 1 / k )$ of this semicircle. Let X be the union of all the sets $L _ { m }$ and $C _ { n , k }$ ,along with two extra points a and b.Topologize X by taking sets of the following four types as basis elements:

(i）The intersection of X with a horizontal open line segment that contains none of the points ${ p } _ { n , k }$

(ii) A set formed from one of the sets $C _ { n , k }$ by deleting finitely many points

(iii) For each even integer m,the union of {a} and the set of points $x \times y$ of X for which $x < m$

(iv） For each even integer m,the union of {b} and the set of points $x \times y$ of X for which $x > m$

(a) Sketch X; show that these sets form a basis for a topology on X.

(b) Let f be a continuous real-valued function on X. Show that for any $c ,$ the set $f ^ { - 1 } ( c )$ isa $G _ { \delta }$ set in X.(This is true for any space X.) Conclude that the set $S _ { n , k }$ consisting of those points p of $C _ { n , k }$ for which $f ( p ) \neq f ( p _ { n , k } )$ is countable.Choose d $\in \left[ - 1 , 0 \right]$ so that the line $y = d$ intersects none of the sets $S _ { n , k }$ . Show that for n odd,

$$
f ( ( n - 1 ) \times d ) = \operatorname* { l i m } _ { k \to \infty } f ( p _ { n , k } ) = f ( ( n + 1 ) \times d ) .
$$

Conclude that $f ( a ) = f ( b )$

(c） Show that X is regular but not completely regular.

## \$34The Urysohn Metrization Theorem

Now we come to the major goal of this chapter, a theorem that gives us conditions under which a topological space is metrizable. The proof weaves together a number of strands from previous parts of the book; it uses results on metric topologies from Chapter 2 as well as facts concerning the countability and separation axioms proved in the present chapter.The basicconstruction used in the prof is asimpleone,but very useful.You willsee it several times more in this book,in various guises.

There are two versions of the proof,and since each has useful generalizations that will appear subsequently,we present both of them here.The first version generalizes to give an imbedding theorem for completely regular spaces. The second version will be generalized in Chapter 6 when we prove the Nagata-Smirnov metrization theorem.

Theorem 34.1 (Urysohn metrization theorem). Every regular space X with a countable basis is metrizable.

Proof.We shallprove that X is metrizable by imbedding X in a metrizable space Y, that is,by showing X homeomorphic with a subspace of Y.The two versions of the proof differ in the choice of the metrizable space Y． In the first version,Y is the space $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the product topology,a space that we have previously proved to be metrizable(Theorem 20.5） In the second version,the space Y is also $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ ,but this time in the topology given by the uniform metric $\bar { \rho }$ (see \$20).In each case,it tums out that our construction actually imbeds X in the subspace $\ [ 0 , 1 ] ^ { \omega }$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$

Step 1 We prove the following: There exists a countable collection of continuous functions $f _ { n } : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ having the property that given any point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ of X and any neighborhood U of xo,there exists an index n such that $f _ { n }$ is positive at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ and vanishes outside U.

It is a consequence of the Urysohn lemma that,given $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ and $\pmb { U } .$ ,there exists such a function. However, if we choose one such function for each pair $( x _ { 0 } , U )$ , the resulting collection will not in general be countable. Our task is to cut the collection down to size.Here is one way to proceed:

Let $\{ B _ { n } \}$ be a countable basis for X．For each pair n,m of indices for which $\bar { B } _ { n } \subset B _ { m }$ ,apply the Urysohn lemma to choose a continuous function $g _ { n , m } \ . \ X $ $\left[ 0 , 1 \right]$ such that $g _ { n , m } ( \bar { B } _ { n } ) = \{ 1 \}$ and $g _ { n , m } ( X - B _ { m } ) = \{ 0 \}$ .Then the collection $\{ g _ { n , m } \}$ satisfes our requirement: Given $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ and given a neighborhood $\boldsymbol { U }$ of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ ,one can choose a basis element $B _ { m }$ containing $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ that is contained in $\boldsymbol { \imath }$ Using regulanity,one can then choose $B _ { n }$ so that $\boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } \in B _ { n }$ and $\bar { B } _ { n } \subset B _ { m }$ .Then n,m is a pair of indices for which the function $g _ { n , m }$ is defined;and it is positive at xo and vanishes outside $\boldsymbol { \imath }$ .Because the collection $\{ g _ { n , m } \}$ is indexed with a subset of $\mathbb { Z } _ { + } \times \mathbb { Z } _ { + }$ ,it is countable;therefore it can be reindexed with the positive integers, giving us the desired collection $\{ f _ { n } \}$

Step 2 (First version of the proof) Given the functions $f _ { n }$ of Step 1, take $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the product topology and define a map $\boldsymbol { F } \cdot \boldsymbol { X } \to \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ by the rule

$$
F ( x ) = ( f _ { 1 } ( x ) , f _ { 2 } ( x ) , . . . ) .
$$

We assert that F is an imbedding.

First,F is continuous because $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ has the product topology and each $f _ { n }$ is continuous. Second, $F$ is injective because given $x \neq y$ ,we know there is an index n such that $f _ { n } ( x ) > 0$ and $f _ { n } ( y ) = 0$ ; therefore, $F ( x ) \neq F ( y )$

Finally.we must prove that F is a homeomorphism of X onto its image,the subspace $Z = F ( X )$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ . We know that F defines a continuous bijection of X with Z,

so we need only show that for each open set U in X,the set $F ( U )$ is open in Z. Let $z _ { 0 }$ be a point of $F ( U )$ .We shall find an open set W of Z such that

$$
z _ { 0 } \in W \subset F ( U ) .
$$

Let $x _ { 0 }$ be the point of U such that $F ( x _ { 0 } ) = { \mathfrak { z } } _ { 0 }$ Choose an index N for which $f _ { N } ( x _ { 0 } ) > 0$ and $f _ { N } ( \pmb { X } - \pmb { U } ) = \{ 0 \}$ . Take the open ray $( 0 , + \infty )$ in R,and let V be the open set

$$
V = \pi _ { N } ^ { - 1 } ( ( 0 , + \infty ) )
$$

of $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ Let $\pmb { W } = \pmb { V } \cap \pmb { Z }$ ；then W is open in Z,by definition of the subspace topology. See Figure 34.1.We assert that $z _ { 0 } \in { \cal W } \subset { \cal F } ( U )$ . First, $z _ { 0 } \in \mathcal { W }$ because

$$
\pi _ { N } ( z _ { 0 } ) = \pi _ { N } ( F ( x _ { 0 } ) ) = f _ { N } ( x _ { 0 } ) > 0 .
$$

Second, $w \subset F ( U )$ .For if $z \in W$ ，then $z = F ( x )$ for some $x \in X$ and $\pi _ { N } ( z ) \in$ $( 0 , + \infty )$ . Since $\pi _ { N } ( z ) = \pi _ { N } ( F ( x ) ) = f _ { N } ( x )$ ,and $f _ { N }$ vanishes outside $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ ,the point x must be in U. Then $z = F ( x )$ is in $F ( U )$ ,as desired.

Thus $F$ Is an imbedding of X in $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 34.1  
Step 3 (Second version of the proof). In this version,we imbed X in the metrc space $( \mathbb { R } ^ { \omega } , \bar { \rho } )$ Actually,we imbed X in the subspace $[ 0 , 1 ] ^ { \omega }$ ,on which $\bar { \pmb \rho }$ equals the metric

$$
\rho ( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } ) = \operatorname* { s u p } \{ | x _ { i } - y _ { i } | \} .
$$

We use the countable collection of functions $f _ { n } : X \to [ 0 , 1 ]$ constructed in Step 1. But now we impose the additional condition that $f _ { n } ( x ) \leq 1 / n$ for all x (This condition is easy to satisfy; we can just divide each function $f _ { n }$ by n.)

Define $F : X  [ 0 , 1 ] ^ { \omega }$ by the equation

$$
F ( x ) = ( f _ { 1 } ( x ) , f _ { 2 } ( x ) , . . . )
$$

as before.We assert that F is now an imbedding relative to the metric $\rho$ on $[ 0 , 1 ] ^ { \omega }$ .We know from Step 2 that F is injective. Furthermore,we know that if we use the product topology on $[ 0 , 1 ] ^ { \omega }$ ,the map $F$ carries open sets of X onto open sets of the subspace $\pmb { Z } = \pmb { F } ( \pmb { X } )$ . This statement remains true if one passes to the finer (larger) topology on $[ 0 , 1 ] ^ { \omega }$ induced by the metric $\rho$

The one thing left to do is to prove that F is continuous. This does not follow from the fact that each component function is continuous,for we are not using the product topology on $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ now.Here is where the assumption $f _ { n } ( x ) \leq 1 / n$ comes in.

Let $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ be a point of $\pmb { \chi } ,$ and let $\epsilon > 0 .$ To prove continuity，we need to find a neighborhood $\boldsymbol { U }$ of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ such that

$$
x \in { U } \Longrightarrow \rho ( F ( x ) , F ( x _ { 0 } ) ) < \epsilon .
$$

First choose N large enough that $1 / N \le \epsilon / 2$ Then for each $n = 1 , \ldots , N$ use the continuity of $f _ { n }$ to choose a neighborhood $U _ { n }$ of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ such that

$$
| f _ { n } ( x ) - f _ { n } ( x _ { 0 } ) | \leq \epsilon / 2
$$

for $x \in U _ { n }$ .Let $U = U _ { 1 } \cap \cdot \cdot \cap U _ { N }$ ；we show that $\boldsymbol { U }$ is the desired neighborhood of $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ Let $x \in U$ .If $n \leq N$

$$
| f _ { n } ( x ) - f _ { n } ( x _ { 0 } ) | \leq \epsilon / 2
$$

by choice of U. And if $n > N$ then

$$
| f _ { n } ( x ) - f _ { n } ( x _ { 0 } ) | < 1 / N \le \epsilon / 2
$$

because $f _ { n }$ maps X into $[ 0 , 1 / n ]$ .Therefore for all $x \in U$

$$
\rho ( F ( x ) , F ( x _ { 0 } ) ) \le \epsilon / 2 < \epsilon ,
$$

as desired.

In Step 2 of the preceding proof, we actually proved something stronger than the result stated there. For later use, we state it here.

Theorem 34.2 (Imbedding theorem). Let X be a space in which one-point sets are closed. Suppose that $\{ f _ { \alpha } \} _ { \alpha \in J }$ is an indexed famuly of continuous functions $f _ { \alpha } \cdot X \to$ R satisfying the requirement that for each point $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ of X and each neighborhood U of ${ \pmb x } _ { \mathbf { 0 } }$ ,there is an indexα such that $f _ { \alpha }$ 1s positive at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ and vanishes outside U.Then the function $F : X  \mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ defined by

$$
F ( x ) = ( f _ { \alpha } ( x ) ) _ { \alpha \in J }
$$

is an imbedding of X in $\mathbb { R } ^ { J } \mathbf { \Omega } _ { I f f _ { \alpha } }$ maps X into [O,I] for each α,then F imbeds X in $[ 0 , 1 ] ^ { J }$

The proof is almost a copy of Step 2 of the preceding proof; one merely replaces n by α,and $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ by $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ ,throughout. One needs one-point sets in X to be closed in order to be sure that, given $x \neq y$ ,there is an index α such that $f _ { \alpha } ( x ) \ne f _ { \alpha } ( y )$

A family of continuous functions that satisfies the hypotheses of this theorem is said to separate points from closed sets in X. The existence of such a famuly is readily seen to be equivalent, for a space X in which one-point sets are closed,to the requirement that X be completely regular. Therefore one has the following immediate corollary:

Theorem 34.3.A space X is completely regular if and only if it is homeomorphic to a subspace of [0,I]' for some J.

## Exercises

1. Give an example showing that a Hausdorff space with a countable basis need not be metrizable.

2.Give an example showing that a space can be completely normal,and satisfy the first countability axiom,the Lindelof condition,and have a countable dense subset,and still not be metrizable.

3.Let X be a compact Hausdorff space. Show that X is metrizable if and only if X has a countable basis.

4.Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space.Is it true that if X has a countable basis,then X is metrizable?Is it true that if X is metrizable,then X has a countable basis?

5.Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space.Let Y be the one-point compactifcation of X.Is it true that if X has a countable basis,then Y is metrizable? Is it true that if Y is metrizable,then X has a countable basis?

6. Check the details of the proof of Theorem 34.2.

7.A space X is locally metrizable if each point x of X has a neighborhood that is metrizable in the subspace topology. Show that a compact Hausdorff space X is metrizable if it is locallymetrizable.{Hint. Show that X is afinite unionof open subspaces,each of which has a countable basis.]

8.Show that a regular Lindelof space is metrizable if it is locally metrizable. [Hint: A closed subspace of a Lindelof space is Lindelof.] Regularity is essential; where do you use it in the proof?

9.Let X be acompact Hausdorff space that is the union of the closed subspaces $\pmb { \chi } _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { \chi } _ { 2 }$ . If $\pmb { \chi } _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { \chi } _ { 2 }$ are metrizable,show that X is metrizable.[Hint: Construct a countable collection A of open sets of X whose intersections with $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ form a basis for $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ ,fori= 1,2.Assume $X _ { 1 } - X _ { 2 }$ and $X _ { 2 } \mathrm { ~ - ~ } X _ { 1 }$ belong to A. Let B consist of finite intersections of elements of A]

## \*\$35The Tietze Extension Theorem+

One immediate consequence of the Urysohn lemma is the useful theorem called the Tietze extension theorem. It deals with the problem of extending a continuous realvalued function that is defined on a subspace of a space X to a continuous function defined on allof X. This theorem 1s important in many of the applications of topology.

Theorem 35.1 (Tietze extension theorem). Let X be a normal space; let A be a closed subspace of X.

(a)Any continuous map of A into the closed interval [a,b] of R may be extended to a continuous map of all of X into [a,b].

(b)Any continuous map of A into R may be extended to a continuous map of all of X into R.

Proof.The idea of the proof is to construct a sequence of continuous functions ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb n }$ defined on the entire space X,such that the sequence $s _ { n }$ converges uniformly,and such that the restriction of $s _ { n }$ to A approximates f more and more closely as n becomes large.Then the limit function will be continuous,and its restriction to A will equal f.

Step l.The first step is to construct a particular function g defined on all of X such that g is not too large,and such that g approximates f on the set A to a fair degree of accuracy To be more precise, let us take the case $f \cdot A  [ - r , r ]$ We assert that there exists a continuous function $g : X \to \mathbb { R }$ such that

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { | g ( x ) | \leq \frac { 1 } { 3 } r } & { { } \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ a l l ~ } x \in X , } \\ { | g ( a ) - f ( a ) | \leq \frac { 2 } { 3 } r } & { { } \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ a l l ~ } a \in A . } \end{array}
$$

The function g is constructed as follows:

Divide the interval $[ - r , r ]$ into three equal intervals of length ${ \frac { 2 } { 3 } } r$

$$
\begin{array} { r } { l _ { 1 } = \left[ - r , - \frac { 1 } { 3 } r \right] , \qquad l _ { 2 } = \left[ - \frac { 1 } { 3 } r , \frac { 1 } { 3 } r \right] , \qquad I _ { 3 } = \left[ \frac { 1 } { 3 } r , r \right] . } \end{array}
$$

Let B and C be the subsets

$$
B = f ^ { - 1 } ( l _ { 1 } ) \mathrm { \quad ~ } \mathrm { a n d \quad } C = f ^ { - 1 } ( l _ { 3 } )
$$

of A.Because f is continuous,B and C are closed disjoint subsets of A.Therefore, they are closed in X.By the Urysohn lemma,there exists a continuous function

$$
g : X \longrightarrow \left[ - { \textstyle \frac { 1 } { 3 } } r , { \textstyle \frac { 1 } { 3 } } r \right]
$$

having the property that $\pmb { \mathscr { g } } ( \pmb { x } ) = - \frac { 1 } { 3 } r$ for each x in B.and $\begin{array} { r } { g ( x ) = \frac { 1 } { 3 } r } \end{array}$ for each x in C. Then $| { g } ( { \pmb x } ) | \leq \frac { 1 } { 3 } r$ for all x.We assert that for each a in A,

$$
\begin{array} { r } { | g ( a ) - f ( a ) | \leq \frac { 2 } { 3 } r . } \end{array}
$$

<!-- image-->  
There are three cases.If $\textbf { \em a } \in \textbf { \em B }$ ,then both $f ( a )$ and ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb a } )$ belong to $I _ { 1 }$ . If ${ \textbf { \em a } } \in C$ then $f ( a )$ and $g ( a )$ are in $I _ { 3 }$ And if a $\pmb { B } \cup \pmb { C }$ ,then $f ( a )$ and ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb a } )$ are in $I _ { 2 }$ . In each case, $\begin{array} { r } { | g ( a ) - \bar { f } ( a ) | \leq \frac { 2 } { 3 } r } \end{array}$ . See Figure 35.1.

Step 2.We now prove part (a) of the Tietze theorem. Without loss of generality, we can replace the arbitrary closed interval $[ a , b ]$ of R by the interval [-1,1].

Let $f \ ^ { \cdot } \ x  [ - 1 , 1 ]$ be a continuous map． Then f satisfies the hypotheses of Step 1, with $r = 1$ .Therefore,there exists a continuous real-valued function $_ { g _ { 1 } }$ defined on all of X,such that

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { | g _ { 1 } ( x ) | \leq 1 / 3 } & { { } { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } x \in X , } \\ { | f ( a ) - g _ { 1 } ( a ) | \leq 2 / 3 } & { { } { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } a \in A . } \end{array}
$$

Now consider the function $f - g _ { 1 }$ . This function maps A into the interval[-2/3,2/3], So we can apply Step l again, leting $r = 2 / 3$ We obtain a real-valued function g2

defined on all of X such that

$$
{ \begin{array} { r l } { | g _ { 2 } ( x ) | \leq { \frac { 1 } { 3 } } \left( { \frac { 2 } { 3 } } \right) } & { { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } x \in X , } \\ { | f ( a ) - g _ { 1 } ( a ) - g _ { 2 } ( a ) | \leq \left( { \frac { 2 } { 3 } } \right) ^ { 2 } } & { { \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } } a \in A } \end{array} }
$$

Then we apply Step l to the function $\pmb { f } - \pmb { g } _ { 1 } - \pmb { g } _ { 2 }$ And so on.

At the general step,we have real-valued functions $g _ { 1 } , \ldots , g _ { n }$ defined on all of X such that

$$
| f ( a ) - g _ { 1 } ( a ) - \cdot \cdot \cdot - g _ { n } ( a ) | \leq { \biggl ( } { \frac { 2 } { 3 } } { \biggr ) } ^ { n }
$$

for $a \in A$ 、Applying Step l to the function $f - g _ { 1 } - \cdot \cdot - g _ { n }$ ,with $r = ( \frac { 2 } { 3 } ) ^ { n }$ ,we obtain a real-valued function $8 n + 1$ defined on all of X such that

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } { | g _ { n + 1 } ( x ) | \le \displaystyle \frac { 1 } { 3 } \left( \displaystyle \frac { 2 } { 3 } \right) ^ { n } } & { { } \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } x \in X , } \\ { | f ( a ) - g _ { 1 } ( a ) - } & { { } \cdot - g _ { n + 1 } ( a ) | \le \displaystyle \left( \displaystyle \frac { 2 } { 3 } \right) ^ { n + 1 } } & { { } \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } a \in A . } \end{array}
$$

By induction,the functions ${ \pmb g } _ { \pmb n }$ are defined for all n.

We now define

$$
g ( x ) = \sum _ { n = 1 } ^ { \infty } g _ { n } ( x )
$$

for all x in X.Of course,we have to know that this infinite series converges.But that follows from the comparison theorem of calculus,it converges by comparison with the geometric senes

$$
{ \frac { 1 } { 3 } } \sum _ { n = 1 } ^ { \infty } \left( { \frac { 2 } { 3 } } \right) ^ { n - 1 } .
$$

To show that g is continuous,we must show that the sequence ${ \pmb { s } } _ { \pmb { n } }$ converges to g uniformly. This fact follows at once from the“Weierstrass $M - \mathrm { t e s t } ^ { \because }$ of analysis. Without assuming this result,one can simply note that if $k > n$ then

$$
\begin{array} { l } { | s _ { k } ( x ) - s _ { n } ( x ) | = \displaystyle \left. \sum _ { i = n + 1 } ^ { k } g _ { i } ( x ) \right. } \\ { \displaystyle \qquad \leq \frac { 1 } { 3 } \displaystyle \sum _ { i = n + 1 } ^ { k } \left( \frac { 2 } { 3 } \right) ^ { i - 1 } } \\ { \displaystyle \qquad < \frac { 1 } { 3 } \displaystyle \sum _ { i = n + 1 } ^ { \infty } \left( \frac { 2 } { 3 } \right) ^ { i - 1 } = \left( \frac { 2 } { 3 } \right) ^ { n } . } \end{array}
$$

Holding n fixed and letting $k \to \infty$ we see that

$$
| g ( x ) - s _ { n } ( x ) | \leq { \biggl ( } { \frac { 2 } { 3 } } { \biggr ) } ^ { n }
$$

for all $x \in X$ Therefore, ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb { n } }$ converges to g uniformly

We show that $g ( a ) = f ( a )$ for $a \in A$ Let $\begin{array} { r } { s _ { n } ( x ) = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } g _ { i } ( x ) } \end{array}$ ,the nth partial sum of the series.Then ${ \pmb g } ( { \pmb x } )$ is by definition the limit of the infinite sequence $s _ { n } ( x )$ of partial sums. Since

$$
| f ( a ) - \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } g _ { i } ( a ) | = | f ( a ) - s _ { n } ( a ) | \leq \left( { \frac { 2 } { 3 } } \right) ^ { n }
$$

for all a in A, it follows that $s _ { n } ( a ) \to f ( a )$ for all ${ \textbf { \textsf { a } } } \in { \textbf { \textsf { A } } } .$ ，Therefore， we have $f ( a ) = g ( a )$ for $a \in A$

Finally,we show that g maps X into the interval[-1,1].This condition is in fact satisfied automatically, since the series $( 1 / 3 ) \sum ( 2 / 3 ) ^ { n }$ converges to 1.However,this is just a lucky accident rather than an essential part of the proof.If all we knew was that g mapped X into R,then the map $\pmb { r } \circ \pmb { g }$ where $r : \mathbb { R } \to [ - 1 , 1 ]$ is the map

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { { r ( y ) = y } } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } | y | \leq 1 , } } \\ { { r ( y ) = y / | y | } } & { { \mathrm { i f ~ } | y | \geq 1 , } } \end{array}
$$

would be an extension of f mapping X into[-l,1].

Step 3 We now prove part (b)of the theorem,in which f maps A into R. We can replace R by the open interval (-l,l),since this interval is homeomorphic to R.

So let f be a continuous map from A into (-1,1). The half of the Tietze theorem already proved shows that we can extend f to a continuous map $g : X \to [ - 1 , 1 ]$ mapping X into the closed interval. How can we find a map h carrying X into the open interval?

Given g,let us define a subset D of X by the equation

$$
D = g ^ { - 1 } ( \{ - 1 \} ) \cup g ^ { - 1 } ( \{ 1 \} ) .
$$

Since g is continuous,D is a closed subset of X.Because $g ( A ) = f ( A )$ ,which is contained in(-l,l),the set A is disjoint from D.By the Urysohn lemma,there is a continuous function $\phi \cdot X  [ 0 , 1 ]$ such that $\phi ( D ) = \{ 0 \}$ and $\phi ( A ) = \{ 1 \}$ . Define

$$
h ( x ) = \phi ( x ) g ( x ) .
$$

Then h is continuous,being the product of two continuous functions.Also,h is an extension of f,since for a in A,

$$
h ( a ) = \phi ( a ) g ( a ) = 1 \cdot g ( a ) = f ( a ) .
$$

Finally,h maps all of X into the open interval $( - 1 , 1 )$ For if $\textbf { \em x } \in \textbf { \em D }$ then $h ( x ) =$ $0 \cdot g ( x ) = 0 .$ And if $x \notin D$ then $| g ( \pmb { x } ) | < 1$ ：it follows that $| h ( x ) | \leq 1 \cdot | g ( x ) | < 1$

## Exercises

1. Show that the Tietze extension theorem implies the Urysohn lemma.

2. In the proof of the Tietze theorem, how essential was the clever decision in Step 1 to divide the interval $\{ - r , r \}$ into three equal pieces? Suppose instead that one divides this interval into the three intervals

$$
I _ { 1 } = [ - r , - a r ] , I _ { 2 } = [ - a r , a r ] , I _ { 3 } = [ a r , r ] ,
$$

for some a with $0 < a < 1$ .For what values of a other than $a = 1 / 3 ( \mathrm { i f \ a n y } )$ does the proof go through?

3.Let X be metrizable. Show that the following are equivalent:

(i) X is bounded under every metric that gives the topology of X.

(ii) Every continuous function $\phi \cdot X  \mathbb { R }$ is bounded.

(iii）X is limut point compact.

[Hint: If $\phi : X  \mathbb { R }$ is a continuous function,then $F ( x ) = x \times \phi ( x )$ is an imbedding of X in $\pmb { \chi } \times \mathbb { R }$ If A is an infinite subset of X having no limut point, let $\phi$ be a surjection of A onto $\mathbb { Z } _ { + }$

4.Let Z be a topological space.If Y is a subspace of Z,we say that Y is a retract of Z if there is a continuous map $r : Z \to Y$ such that $r ( \boldsymbol { y } ) = y$ for each $y \in Y$ (a)Show that if Z is Hausdorff and Y is a retract of Z,then Y is closed in Z.

(b)Let A be a two-point set in $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ .Show that A is not aretract of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

(c） Let $s ^ { 1 }$ be the unit circle in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ ；show that $s ^ { 1 }$ is a retract of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } - \{ \boldsymbol { \mathbf { 0 } } \}$ ,where 0 is the origin.Can you conjecture whether or not $S ^ { 1 }$ is a retract of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } ?$

5.A space Y is said to have the universal extension property if for each triple consistng of a normal space X,a closed subset A of $\pmb { \chi } .$ ,and a continuous function $f : A \to Y$ ,there exists an extension of f to a continuous map of X into Y.

(a） Show that $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ has the universal extension property.

(b） Show that if Y is homeomorphic to a retract of $\mathbb { R } ^ { J }$ ,then Y has the universal extension property

6.Let Y be a normal space Then Y is said to be an absolute retract if for every pair of spaces $( Y _ { 0 } , Z )$ such that Z is normal and $Y _ { 0 }$ is a closed subspace of $z$ homeomorphic to Y,the space $Y _ { 0 }$ is a retract of Z.

(a）Show that if Y has the universal extension property,then Y is an absolute retract.

(b) Show that if Y is an absolute retract and Y is compact, then Y has the universal extension property. [Hint. Assume the Tychonoff theorem,so you know [0, $1 ] ^ { J }$ is normal. Imbed Y in $[ 0 , 1 ] ^ { J }$

7.(a） Show the logarithmic spiral

$$
C = \{ 0 \times 0 \} \cup \{ e ^ { t } \cos t \times e ^ { t } \sin t \mid t \in \mathbb { R } \}
$$

is a retract of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ .Can you define a specific retraction $r \cdot \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \to C ?$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 35.2

(b） Show that the“knotted x-axis" K of Figure 35.2 is a retract of ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$

\*8. Prove the following.

Theorem．Let Y be a normal space. Then Y is an absolute retract if and only if Y has the universal extension property.

[Hint:If X and Yare disjoint normal spaces,A is closed in X,and $f : A \to Y$ is a continuous map,define the adjunction space $\boldsymbol { z } _ { f }$ to be the quotient space obtained from XUYby identifying each point a of A with the point $f ( a )$ and with all the points of $f ^ { - 1 } ( \{ f ( a ) \} )$ .Using the Tietze theorem,show that $\boldsymbol { z } _ { f }$ is normal. If $p \cdot X \cup Y  Z _ { f }$ is the quotient map,show that $\pmb { p } | \pmb { Y }$ is a homeomorphism of Y with a closed subspace of $\boldsymbol { z } _ { f \cdot } ]$

9.Let $X _ { 1 } \subset X _ { 2 } \subset \cdots$ ：be a sequence of spaces,where $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ is a closed subspace of $X _ { i + 1 }$ for each i.Let X be the union of the $X _ { i } ;$ let us topologize X by declaring a set U to be open in X if $U \cap X _ { i }$ is open in X for each i.

(a) Show that this is a topology on X and that each space $\pmb { \chi } ,$ is a subspace (in fact,a closed subspace)of X in this topology. This topology is called the topology coherent with the subspaces $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$

(b） Show that $f : X \to Y$ is continuous if $f | X _ { i }$ is continuous for each i.

(c） Show that if each space $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ is normal,then X is normal.[Hint:Given disjoint closed sets A and B in X,set fequal toOon A andl on B,and extend f successively to $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B } \cup \pmb { X } _ { i }$ for i = 1,2,... ]

## \*\$36Imbeddings of Manifolds+

We have shown that every regular space with a countable basis can be imbedded in the “infinite-dimensional"euclidean space $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ It is natural to ask under what conditions a space X can be umbedded in some finite-dimensional euclidean space ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { N }$ . One answer to this question is given in this section.A more general answer will be obtained in Chapter 8,when we study dimension theory.

Definition. An m-manifold is a Hausdorff space X with a countable basis such that each point x of X has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic with an open subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$

A l-manifold is often called a curve,and a 2-manifold is called a surface. Manifolds form a very important class of spaces;they are much studied in differential geometry and algebraic topology.

We shallprove that if X is acompact manifold,then X can be imbedded in a finitedimensional euclidean space. The theorem holds without the assumption of compactness,but the proof is a good deal harder.

First, we need some terminology.

If $\phi : X \to \mathbb { R }$ ，then the support of $\pmb { \phi }$ is defined to be the closure of the set $\phi ^ { - 1 } ( \mathbb { R } - \{ 0 \} )$ . Thus if x lies outside the support of $\pmb { \phi } .$ ,there is some neighborhood of x on which $\phi$ vanishes

Definition.Let $\{ U _ { 1 } , \dotsc , U _ { n } \}$ be a finite indexed open covering of the space X. An indexed family of continuous functions

$$
\phi _ { i } : X \longrightarrow [ 0 , 1 ] \quad \mathrm { ~ f o r ~ } i = 1 , \ldots , n ,
$$

is said to be apartition of unity dominated by $\{ U _ { \iota } \}$ if

(1） (support $\phi _ { i } ) \subset U _ { i }$ for each i.

(2) $\textstyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } \phi _ { i } ( x ) = 1$ for each x.

Theorem 36.1 (Existence of finite partitions of unity). Let $\{ U _ { 1 } , \dots , U _ { n } \}$ be a finite open covering of the normal space X.Then there exists a partition of unity dominated by $\{ U _ { i } \}$

Proof.Step 1. First,we prove that one can “shrink" the covering $\{ U _ { i } \}$ to an open covering $\{ V _ { 1 } , \ldots , V _ { n } \}$ of $\pmb { \chi }$ such that ${ \bar { V } } _ { i } \subset U _ { i }$ for each i.

We proceed by induction.First, note that the set

$$
A = X - ( U _ { 2 } \cup \quad \cdot \cup U _ { n } )
$$

is a closed subset of X.Because $\{ U _ { 1 } , \dotsc , U _ { n } \}$ covers $\pmb { \chi }$ ,the set A is contained in the open set $U _ { 1 }$ . Using normality, choose an open set $V _ { \mathrm { I } }$ containing A such that ${ \bar { v } } _ { 1 } \subset U _ { 1 }$ Then the collection $\{ V _ { 1 } , U _ { 2 } , \dots , U _ { n } \}$ covers X

In general,given open sets $V _ { 1 } , \dots , V _ { k - 1 }$ such that the collection

$$
\{ V _ { 1 } , ~ \ldots , V _ { k - 1 } , U _ { k } , U _ { k + 1 } , \ldots ~ , U _ { n } \}
$$

covers X, let

$$
A = X - ( V _ { 1 } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup V _ { k - 1 } ) - ( U _ { k + 1 } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup U _ { n } ) .
$$

Then A is a closed subset of X which is contained in the open set $U _ { k }$ . Choose $V _ { k }$ to be an open set containing A such that $\bar { V } _ { k } \subset U _ { k }$ . Then $\{ V _ { 1 } , \dotsc , V _ { k - 1 } , V _ { k } , U _ { k + 1 } , \dotsc , U _ { n } \}$ covers X.At the nth step of the induction,our result is proved.

Step 2 Now we prove the theorem. Given the open covering $\{ U _ { 1 } , \dots , U _ { n } \}$ of X, choose an open covering $\{ V _ { 1 } , \ldots , V _ { n } \}$ of X such that $\bar { V } _ { i } \subset U _ { i }$ for each i. Then choose an open covering $\{ W _ { 1 } , \ldots , W _ { n } \}$ of X such that $\widehat { \pmb { W } } _ { i } \subset \boldsymbol { V } _ { i }$ for eachi Using the Urysohn lemma, choose for each i a continuous function

$$
\psi _ { i } : X \longrightarrow [ 0 , 1 ]
$$

such that $\psi _ { i } ( \overrightarrow { W } _ { i } ) = \{ 1 \}$ and $\psi _ { i } ( X - V _ { i } ) = \{ 0 \}$ . Since $\psi _ { i } ^ { - 1 } ( R - \{ 0 \} )$ is contained in $V _ { \imath }$ ， we have

$$
\mathsf { ( s u p p o r t } \psi _ { i } ) \subset \bar { V } _ { i } \subset U _ { i } .
$$

Because the collection $\{ { \pmb W } _ { i } \}$ covers X,the sum $\begin{array} { r } { \Psi ( x ) = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } \psi _ { i } ( x ) } \end{array}$ is positive for each x.Therefore,we may define,for each $j$

$$
\phi _ { J } ( x ) = { \frac { \psi _ { j } ( x ) } { \Psi ( x ) } } .
$$

It is easy to check that the functions $\phi _ { 1 } , . . . , \phi _ { n }$ form the desured partition of unity. ■

There is a comparable notion of partition of unitv when the open covering and the collection of functions are not finite,nor even countable.We shall consider this matter in Chapter 6,when we study paracompactness.

Theorem 36.2.If X is a compact m-manifold,then X can be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ for some positive integer N.

Proof. Cover X by finitely many open sets $\{ U _ { 1 } , \dots , U _ { n } \}$ ,each of which may be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ .Choose imbeddings $g _ { i } : U _ { i } \to \mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ for each i.Being compact and Hausdorff,X is normal. Let $\phi _ { 1 } , . . . , \phi _ { n }$ be a partition of unity dominated by $\{ U _ { i } \}$ ;let $A _ { i } = \operatorname { s u p p o n } \phi _ { i }$ .Foreach $i = 1 , \ldots , n$ ,define a function $h _ { i } : X  \mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ by the rule

$$
\begin{array} { r } { h _ { \iota } ( \boldsymbol { x } ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { \phi _ { i } ( \boldsymbol { x } ) } & { \mathrm { f o r } \boldsymbol { x } \in U _ { i } , } \\ { \boldsymbol { \mathbf { \theta } } = ( 0 , \ldots , 0 ) } & { \mathrm { f o r } \boldsymbol { x } \in X - A _ { i } . } \end{array} \right. } \end{array}
$$

[Here $\phi _ { i } ( x )$ is a real number c and $g _ { i } ( x )$ is a point $\mathbf { y } = ( y _ { 1 } , \dots , y _ { m } )$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ : the product C y denotes of course the point $( c y _ { 1 } , \ldots , c y _ { m } ) \ \mathrm { o f } \ \mathbb { R } ^ { m } . ]$ The function $\pmb { h } _ { i }$ is well defined because the two definitions of $\pmb { h } _ { i }$ agree on the intersection of their domains,and $h _ { i }$ is continuous because its restrictions to the open sets $U _ { i }$ and $\textstyle X - A _ { \iota }$ are continuous.

Now define

$$
\begin{array} { r } { F : X \longrightarrow ( \underbrace { \mathbb { R } \times \dots \times \mathbb { R } } _ { n \mathrm { ~ u i m e s } } \times \underbrace { \mathbb { R } ^ { m } \times \dots \times \mathbb { R } ^ { m } } _ { n \mathrm { ~ t i m e s } } ) } \end{array}
$$

by the rule

$$
F ( x ) = ( \phi _ { 1 } ( x ) , \ldots , \phi _ { n } ( x ) , h _ { 1 } ( x ) , \ldots , h _ { n } ( x ) )
$$

Clearly,F is continuous.To prove that F is an imbedding we need only to show that F is injective (because X is compact). Suppose that $F ( x ) = F ( y )$ Then $\phi _ { i } ( { \pmb x } ) =$ $\phi _ { i } ( y )$ and $h _ { i } ( x ) = h _ { \iota } ( y )$ for alli.Now $\phi _ { i } ( x ) > 0$ for some i[since $\sum \phi _ { i } \left( x \right) = 1 ]$ Therefore, $\phi _ { i } ( \mathbf { y } ) > 0$ also, so that x, $y \in U _ { i }$ . Then

$$
\phi _ { i } ( x ) \cdot g _ { i } ( x ) = h _ { i } ( x ) = h _ { i } ( y ) = \phi _ { i } ( y ) \cdot g _ { i } ( y )
$$

Because $\phi _ { \iota } ( x ) = \phi _ { i } ( y ) > 0$ ，we conclude that $g _ { i } ( x ) = g _ { i } ( y )$ . But $g _ { i } : U _ { i } \to \mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ is injective,so that $\boldsymbol { x } = \boldsymbol { y }$ ,as desired.

In many applications of partitions of unity,such as the one just given,all one needs to know is that the sum $\sum \phi _ { i } ( x )$ is positive for each x. In others, however,one needs the stronger condition that that $\sum \phi _ { i } ( x ) = 1$ . See \$50.

## Exercises

1. Prove that every manifold is regular and hence metrizable. Where do you use the Hausdorff condition?

2.Let X be a compact Hausdorff space.Suppose that for each $x \in X$ ，there is a neighborhood U of x and a positive integer k such that U can be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { k }$ Show that X can be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ for some positive integer N.

3.Let X be a Hausdorff space such that each point of X has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic with an open subset of $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ .Show that if X is compact,then X is an m-manifold.

4.An indexed family $\{ A _ { \alpha } \}$ of subsets of X is said to be apoint-finite indexed family if each $x \in X$ belongs to $\pmb { A } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for only finitely many values of α.

Lemma (The shrinking lemma).Let X be a normal space, let $\{ U _ { 1 } , U _ { 2 } , \dots \}$ be a point-finite indexed open covering of X.Then there exists an indexed open covering $\{ V _ { 1 } , V _ { 2 } , \ldots \}$ of X such that $\bar { V } _ { n } \subset U _ { n }$ for each n.

5.The Hausdorff condition is an essential part of the definition of a manifold; it is not implied by the other parts of the definition.Consider the following space: Let X be the union of the set $\mathbb { R } - \{ 0 \}$ and the two-point set $\{ p , q \}$ .Topologize X by taking as basis the collection of all open intervals in R that do not contain 0, along with all sets of the form $( - a , 0 ) \cup \{ p \} \cup ( 0 , a )$ and all sets of the form $( - a , 0 ) \cup \{ q \} \cup ( 0 , a )$ ，for $a \ > \ 0$ .The space X is called the line with two origins

(a) Check that this is a basis for atopology

(b） Show that each of the spaces $X - \{ p \}$ and $X - \{ q \}$ is homeomorphic to R.

(c） Show that X satisfies the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom,but is not Hausdorff.

(d） Show that X satisfies allthe conditions fora l-manifold except for the Hausdorff condition.

## \*Supplementary Exercises: Review of the Basics

Consider the following properties a space may satisfy:

(1） connected

(2） path connected

(3） locally connected

(4） locally path connected

(5） compact

(6）limit point compact

（7） locally compact Hausdorff

(8） Hausdorff

(9)regular

(10）completely regular

(11） normal

(12） first-countable

(13）second-countable

(14) Lindelof

(l5）has a countable dense subset

（16） locally metrizable

（17）metrizable

1. For each of the following spaces,determine (if you can) which of these properties it satisfies. (Assume the Tychonoff theorem if you need it.)

(a) $s _ { \Omega }$

(b) $\bar { s } _ { \Omega }$

（c） $\boldsymbol { s } _ { \Omega } \times \bar { \boldsymbol { s } } _ { \Omega }$

(d） The ordered square

(e) ${ \mathbb R } _ { t }$

(f) $\mathbb { R } _ { \ell } ^ { 2 }$

(g） $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the product topology

(h) $\mathbb { R } ^ { \omega }$ in the uniform topology

() ${ \mathbb R } ^ { \omega }$ in the box topology

$\mathbb { R } ^ { I }$ in the product topology, where /= [0,1]

(k) $\mathbb { R } _ { K }$

2. Which of these properties does a metrc space necessarily have?

3.Which of these properties does a compact Hausdorf space have?

4.Which of these properties are preserved when one passes to a subspace? To a closed subspace? To an open subspace?

5.Which of these properties are preserved under finite products? Countable products?Arbitrary products?