Then $\rho$ is well-defined,for if f lies in both U and V,

$$
\phi _ { 1 } ( [ f ] _ { U } ) = \phi _ { 1 } i _ { 1 } ( [ f ] _ { U \cap V } ) \quad \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } \quad \phi _ { 2 } ( [ f ] _ { V } ) = \phi _ { 2 } i _ { 2 } ( [ f ] _ { U \cap V } ) ,
$$

and these two elements of H are equal by hypothesis. The set map $\rho$ satisfies the following conditions:

(1)If $[ f ] _ { U } = [ g ] _ { U } , \mathrm { o r } \mathrm { i f } \ [ f ] _ { V } = [ g ] _ { V } , \mathrm { t h e n } \rho ( f ) = \rho ( g )$

(2) If both fand g lie in U,or if both lie in V,then $\rho ( f * g ) = \rho ( f ) \cdot \rho ( g )$

The first holds by definition,and the second holds because $\phi _ { 1 }$ and $\phi _ { 2 }$ are homomorphisms.

Step 2.We now extend $\rho$ to a set map g that assigns,to each path $\pmb { f }$ lying in $\boldsymbol { U }$ or V,an element of $\pmb { H }$ 、such that the map σ satisfies condition (l) of Step 1,and satisfies (2) when $f * g$ is defined.

To begin, we choose,for each x in X,a path $\pmb { \alpha } _ { x }$ from xo to x,as follows: $\mathbf { I f } \ x = x _ { 0 }$ let $\pmb { \alpha } _ { x }$ be the constant path at xo.If $x \in U \cap V$ ,let $\pmb { \alpha } _ { x }$ be a path in $U \cap V$ .And if x is in U or V but not in $U \cap V$ ,let ${ \pmb { \alpha } } _ { \pmb { x } }$ be a path in U or V,respectively.

Then, for any path f in $\pmb { U }$ or in V, we define a loop $L ( f )$ in $\pmb { U }$ or V, res pectively, based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ ,by the equation

$$
L ( f ) = \alpha _ { x } * ( f * \bar { \alpha } _ { y } ) ,
$$

where x is the initial point offandyis the final point of $f$ See Figure 70.1.Finally, we define

$$
\sigma ( f ) = \rho ( L ( f ) ) .
$$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 70.1

First, we show that $\pmb { \sigma }$ is an extension of $\rho$ . If f is a loop based at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ lying in either U or V,then

$$
L ( f ) = e _ { x _ { 0 } } * ( f * e _ { x _ { 0 } } )
$$

because ${ \pmb { \alpha } } _ { x _ { 0 } }$ is the constant path at $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ Then $L ( f )$ is path homotopic to f in either U or V,so that $\rho ( L ( f ) ) = \rho ( f )$ by condition(l） for $\pmb { \rho }$ Hence $\sigma ( f ) = \rho ( f )$

To check condition (I), let f and g be paths that are path homotopic in U or in V.Then the loops $L ( f )$ and $\pmb { { \cal L } } ( \pmb { \ 2 } )$ are also path homotopic either in U or in V,so condition (l） for $\rho$ applies.To check (2), let $f$ and $\pmb { \mathscr { g } }$ be arbitrary paths in U or in V such that $f ( 1 ) = g ( 0 )$ . We have

$$
L ( f ) * L ( g ) = ( \alpha _ { x } * ( f * \bar { \alpha } _ { y } ) ) * ( \alpha _ { y } * ( g * \bar { \alpha } _ { z } ) )
$$

for appropriate points x,y,and z; this loop is path homotopic in U or V to $L ( f * g )$ Then

$$
\rho ( L ( f \ast g ) ) = \rho ( L ( f ) \ast L ( g ) ) = \rho ( L ( f ) ) \cdot \rho ( L ( g ) )
$$

by conditions (I) and (2) for $\rho$ Hence $\sigma ( f * g ) = \sigma ( f ) \cdot \sigma ( g )$

Step 3.Finally,we extend σ to a set map t that assigns, to an arbitrary path f of X,an element of H. It willsatisfy the following conditions:

(1）If[f]= [g], then $\tau ( f ) = \tau ( g )$

(2) $\tau ( f * g ) = \tau ( f ) \cdot \tau ( g ) { \mathrm { i f ~ } } f * g$ is defined.

Given f,choose a subdivision $s _ { 0 } < \cdots < s _ { n }$ of [0,1] such that f maps each of the subintervals $[ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } ]$ into U or V. Let $f _ { i }$ denote the positive linear map of [0,1] onto $\{ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } \}$ followed by $f .$ Then $f _ { i }$ is a path in U or in V,and

$$
[ f ] = [ f _ { 1 } ] * \cdot \cdot \cdot * [ f _ { n } ] .
$$

If t is to be an extension of g and satisfy (l) and (2), we must have

$$
\tau ( f ) = \sigma ( f _ { 1 } ) \cdot \sigma ( f _ { 2 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( f _ { n } ) .\tag{*}
$$

So we shall use this equation as our definition of t.

We show that this definition is independent of the choice of subdivision.It suffices to show that the value of $\tau ( f )$ remains unchanged if we adjoin a single additional point p to the subdivision. Let i be the index such that $s _ { i - 1 } < p < s _ { i }$ . If we compute $\pmb { \tau } ( f )$ using this new subdivision,the only change in formula(\*） is that the factor $\pmb { \sigma } ( f _ { i } )$ disappears and is replaced by the product $\sigma ( f _ { i } ^ { \prime } ) \cdot \sigma ( f _ { i } ^ { \prime \prime } )$ ,where $f _ { i } ^ { \prime }$ and $f _ { i } ^ { \prime \prime }$ equal the positive linear maps of [0,1] to $[ s _ { i - 1 } , p ]$ and to $[ p , s _ { i } ]$ ,respectively,followed by f $f .$ But $f _ { i }$ is path homotopic to $f _ { i } ^ { \prime } * f _ { i } ^ { \prime \prime }$ in U or V,so that $\sigma ( f _ { i } ) = \sigma ( f _ { i } ^ { \prime } ) \sigma ( f _ { i } ^ { \prime \prime } )$ ,by conditions(l) and (2) for $\pmb { \sigma }$ .Thust is well-defined.

It follows that t is an extension of o.For if f already lies in U or V,we can use the trivial partition of [O,1] to define $\pmb { \tau } ( f )$ ; then $\tau ( f ) = \sigma ( f )$ by definition.

Step 4. We prove condition(1)for the set map t This part of the proofrequires some care.

We first verfy thus condition in a special case.Let f and g be paths in X from x to y,say,and let F be a path homotopy between them.Let us assume the additional hypothesis that there exists a subdivision $s _ { 0 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$ of [0,1] such that F carries each rectangle $R _ { i } = [ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } ] \times I$ into either U or V.We show in this case that $\tau ( f ) =$ $\pmb { \tau } ( \pmb { g } )$

Given i,consider the positive linear map of [O.1] onto $[ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } ]$ followed by f or by g; and call these two paths $f _ { l }$ and ${ { \pmb g } _ { i } }$ ,respectively. The restriction of $\pmb { F }$ t0 the rectangle $\pmb { R _ { i } }$ gives us a homotopy between $f _ { i }$ and $\pmb { g } _ { i }$ that takes place in either U or V,but it is not a path homotopy because the end points of the paths may move during the homotopy. Let us consider the paths traced out by these end points during the homotopy. We define $\beta _ { i }$ to be the path $\beta _ { i } ( t ) = F ( s _ { i } , t )$ . Then $\beta _ { i }$ is a path in X from $f ( s _ { i } )$ t $g ( s _ { i } )$ . The paths $\beta _ { 0 }$ and $\beta _ { \pmb { n } }$ are the constant paths at x and y,respectively. See Figure 70.2. We show that for each i,

$$
f _ { i } * \beta _ { i } \simeq _ { p } \beta _ { i - 1 } * g _ { i } ,
$$

with the path homotopy taking place in U or in V.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 70.2  
In the rectangle $\pmb { R _ { i } }$ ,take the broken-line path that runs along the bottom and right edges of $R _ { i }$ ,from $s _ { i - 1 } \times 0$ to $s _ { i } \times 0$ to $s _ { i } \times 1$ ; if we follow this path by the map $\pmb { F }$ we obtain the path $f _ { i } * \beta _ { i }$ . Similarly,if we take the broken-line path along the left and top edges of $\pmb { R _ { i } }$ and follow it by $\pmb { F }$ ，we obtain the path $\beta _ { i - 1 } * g _ { i }$ .Because $R _ { i }$ is convex, there is a path homotopy in $R _ { i }$ between these two broken-line paths; if we follow by F, we obtain a path homotopy between $f _ { i } * \beta _ { i }$ and $\beta _ { i - 1 } * g _ { i }$ that takes place in either U or V,as desired.

lt follows from conditions (l) and (2) for g that

$$
\sigma ( f _ { i } ) \cdot \sigma ( \beta _ { i } ) = \sigma ( \beta _ { i - 1 } ) \cdot \sigma ( g _ { i } ) ,
$$

so that

（\*\*）

$$
\sigma ( f _ { i } ) = \sigma ( \beta _ { i - 1 } ) \cdot \sigma ( g _ { i } ) \cdot \sigma ( \beta _ { i } ) ^ { - 1 } .
$$

It follows similarly that since $\beta _ { 0 }$ and $\beta _ { n }$ are constant paths, $\sigma ( \beta _ { 0 } ) = \sigma ( \beta _ { n } ) = 1$ .(For the fact that $\beta _ { 0 } * \beta _ { 0 } = \beta _ { 0 }$ implies that $\sigma ( { \boldsymbol { \beta } } _ { 0 } ) \cdot \sigma ( { \boldsymbol { \beta } } _ { 0 } ) = \sigma ( { \boldsymbol { \beta } } _ { 0 } ) . )$

We now compute as follows.

$$
\tau ( f ) = \sigma ( f _ { 1 } ) \cdot \sigma ( f _ { 2 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( f _ { n } ) .
$$

Substituting (\*\*) in this equation and simplifying,we have the equation

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \tau ( f ) = \sigma ( g _ { 1 } ) \cdot \sigma ( g _ { 2 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( g _ { n } ) } & { { } } \\ { = \tau ( g ) . } \end{array}
$$

Thus,we have proved condition (1) in our special case.

Now we prove condition (l) in the general case. Given f and g and a path homotopy F between them,let us choose subdivisions $s _ { 0 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$ and $t _ { 0 } , \ldots , t _ { m }$ of [0,1] such that F maps each subrectangle $[ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } ] \times [ t _ { j - 1 } , t _ { j } ]$ into either U or V. Let $f _ { j }$ be the path $f _ { J } ( s ) = F ( s , t _ { j } )$ ; then $f _ { 0 } = f$ and $f _ { m } = g$ . The pair of paths $f _ { j - 1 }$ and $f _ { j }$ satisfy the requirements of our special case,so that $\tau ( f _ { j - 1 } ) = \tau ( f _ { j } )$ for each $j .$ It follows that $\tau ( f ) = \tau ( g )$ ,as desired.

Step 5. Now we prove condition (2) for the set map t. Given a path $f * g$ in X, let us choose a subdivision $s _ { 0 } ~ < ~ \cdots ~ < ~ s _ { n }$ of $\left[ 0 , 1 \right]$ containing the point $1 / 2$ asa subdivision point, such that $f * g$ carries each subinterval into either U or V.Let k be the index such that $s _ { k } = 1 / 2$

For $i = 1 , \ldots , k$ 、the positive linear map of [0,1] to $[ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } ]$ ,followed by $f * g$ is the same as the positive linear map of $\left[ 0 , 1 \right]$ to $[ 2 s _ { i - 1 } , 2 s _ { i } ]$ followed by $f ;$ call this map $f _ { i }$ Simularly, for $i = k + 1 , \ldots , n$ ,the positive linear map of [0,1] to $\left[ s _ { i - 1 } , s _ { i } \right]$ = followed by $f * g$ ,is the same as the positive linear map of [O,1] to $[ 2 s _ { i - 1 } - 1 , 2 s _ { i } - 1 ]$ followed byg;call this map ${ \pmb { \beta } } _ { i - k }$ .Using the subdivision $s _ { 0 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$ for the domain of the path $f * g$ we have

$$
\tau ( f * g ) = \sigma ( f _ { 1 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( f _ { k } ) \cdot \sigma ( g _ { 1 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( g _ { n - k } ) .
$$

Using the subdivision $2 s _ { 0 } , \ldots , 2 s _ { k }$ for the path $f ,$ we have

$$
\tau ( f ) = \sigma ( f _ { 1 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( f _ { k } ) .
$$

And using the subdivision $2 s _ { k } - 1 , \ldots , 2 s _ { n } - 1$ for the path g, we have

$$
\tau ( g ) = \sigma ( g _ { 1 } ) \cdot \cdot \cdot \sigma ( g _ { n - k } ) .
$$

Thus (2) holds trivially.

Step 6. The theorem follows.For each loop f in X based at xo, we define

$$
\Phi ( [ f ] ) = \tau ( f ) .
$$

Conditions (1） and (2) show that $\Phi$ is a well-defined homomorphism.

Let us show that $\Phi \circ j _ { 1 } = \phi _ { 1 }$ . If f is a loop in U,then

$$
\begin{array} { l c r } { { \Phi ( j _ { 1 } ( [ f ] _ { U } ) ) = \Phi ( \{ f \} ) } } \\ { { \ } } \\ { { \ } } \\ { { \Phi ( f ) = \epsilon ( f ) } } \\ { { \ } } \\ { { \ } } \end{array}
$$

as desired. The proof that Φo $j _ { 2 } = \phi _ { 2 }$ is similar

The preceding theorem is the modern formulation of the Seifert-van Kampen theorem. We now turn to_the classical version, which involves the free product of two groups.Recall that if G is the external free product $G = G _ { 1 } * G _ { 2 }$ , we often treat $G _ { 1 }$ and $G _ { 2 }$ as if they were subgroups of $\pmb { G }$ ,for simplicity of notation.

Theorem 70.2 (Seifert-van Kampen theorem, classical version). Assurne the hypotheses of the preceding theorem.Let

$$
j : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) * \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )
$$

be the homomorphism of the free product that extends the homomorphisms $j _ { 1 }$ and $j _ { 2 }$ inducedby inclusion. Then j is surjective,and its kernel is the least normal subgroup N of the free product that contains all elements represented by words of the form

$$
( i _ { 1 } ( g ) ^ { - 1 } , \mathrm { i } _ { 2 } ( g ) ) ,
$$

for $g \in \pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } )$

Said differently,the kernel of j is generated by all elements of the free product of the form $i _ { 1 } ( g ) ^ { - 1 } i _ { 2 } ( g )$ ,and their conjugates.

Proof.The fact that $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ is generated by the images of $j _ { 1 }$ and $j _ { 2 }$ implies that j is surjective.

We show that $N \subset \mathop { \mathrm { \bf ~ k e r } } j$ ，Since ker j is normal, it is enough to show that $i _ { 1 } ( g ) ^ { - 1 } i _ { 2 } ( g )$ belongs to ker j for each $g \in \pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } )$ If $i : U \cap V \ \to \ X$ is the inclusion mapping, then

$$
j i _ { 1 } ( g ) = j _ { 1 } i _ { 1 } ( g ) = i _ { * } ( g ) = j _ { 2 } i _ { 2 } ( g ) = j i _ { 2 } ( g ) .
$$

Then $i _ { 1 } ( g ) ^ { - 1 } i _ { 2 } ( g )$ belongs to the kerel of $j$

It follows that j induces an epimorphism

$$
k : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) * \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) / N \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) .
$$

We show that N equals ker j by showing that k is injective.It suffices to show that k has a left inverse.

Let H denote the group $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) * \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) / N$ Let $\phi _ { 1 } : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) \to H$ equal the inclusion of $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ into the free product followed by projection of the free product onto its quotient by N. Let $\phi _ { 2 } : \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) \to H$ be defined similarly. Consider the diagram

<!-- image-->

It is easy to see that $\phi _ { 1 } \circ i _ { 1 } = \phi _ { 2 } \circ i _ { 2 }$ For if $g \in \pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } )$ ,then $\phi _ { 1 } ( i _ { 1 } ( g ) )$ is the coset $i _ { 1 } ( g ) N$ in H,and $\phi _ { 2 } ( i _ { 2 } ( g ) )$ is the coset $i _ { 2 } ( g ) N$ . Because $i _ { 1 } ( g ) ^ { - 1 } i _ { 2 } ( g ) \in N$ these cosets are equal.

It follows from Theorem 7O.I that there is a homomorphism $\Phi : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )  H$ such that $\Phi \circ j _ { 1 } = \phi _ { 1 }$ and $\Phi \circ j _ { 2 } = \phi _ { 2 }$ .We show that  is a left inverse for k.It suffces to show that Φo k acts as the identity on any generator of H,that is,on any coset of the form $g N$ ,wheregis in $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ or $\pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } )$ . But if $g \in \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ ,we have

$$
k ( g N ) = j ( g ) = j _ { ! } ( g ) ,
$$

so that

$$
\Phi ( k ( g N ) ) = \Phi ( j _ { 1 } ( g ) ) = \phi _ { 1 } ( g ) = g N ,
$$

as desired.A similar remark applies if $g \in \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } )$

Corollary 70.3. Assume the hypotheses of the Seifert-van Kampen theorem. If U∩ V is simply connected,then there is an isomorphism

$$
k : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) * \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) .
$$

Corollary 70.4. Assume the hypotheses of the Seifert-van Kampen theorem. If V is simply connected,there is an isomorphism

$$
k : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) / N \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) ,
$$

where N is the least normal subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ containing the image of the homomorphism

$$
i _ { 1 } : \pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) .
$$

ExAMPLE1Let X be a theta-space. Then X is a Hausdorff space that is the union of three arcs A, B,and C,each pair of which intersect precisely in their end points p and q. We showed earlier that the fundamental group of X is not abelian.We show here that this group is in fact a free group on two generators.

Let a be an intenor point of A and let b be an interior point of B.Write X as the union of the open sets $U = { \pmb X } - { \pmb a }$ and $V = X - b ,$ See Figure70.3.The space $U \cap V = X - a - b$ issimply connected because it is contractible. Furthermore,U and V have infinute cyclic fundamental groups,because U has the homotopy type of $\pmb { { \cal B } } \cup \pmb { C }$ and V has the homotopy type of $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { C }$ ，Therefore,the fundamental group of X is the free product of two infinite cyclic groups,that is,it is a free group on two generators.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 70.3

## Exercises

In the following exercises,assume the hypotheses of the Seifert-van Kampen theorem.

1.Suppose that the homomorphism i. induced by inclusion $i : U \cap V \ \to \ X$ is trivial.

(a) Show that $j _ { 1 }$ and $j _ { 2 }$ induce an epimorphism

$$
h : ( \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) / N _ { 1 } ) * ( \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) / N _ { 2 } ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) ,
$$

where $N _ { 1 }$ is the least normal subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ containing image $i _ { 1 }$ ,and $N _ { 2 }$ is the least normal subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } )$ containing image $i _ { 2 }$

(b) Show that h is an isomorphism. [Hint: Use Theorem 70.I to define a left inverse for h.]

2. Suppose that $i _ { 2 }$ is surjective.

(a) Show that $j _ { 1 }$ induces an epimorphism

$$
h : \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) / M \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } ) ,
$$

where M is the least normal subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ containing $i _ { \mathrm { ~ i ~ } } ( \mathbf { k e r } i _ { 2 } )$ [Hint: Show $j _ { 1 }$ is surjective.]

(b) Show that h is an isomorphism. [Hint: Let $H = \pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) / M$ Let $\phi _ { 1 }$ ： $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) \to H$ be the projection. Use the fact that $\pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } ) { \big / }$ ker $i _ { 2 }$ is isomorphic to $\pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } )$ to define a homomorphism $\phi _ { 2 } : \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } ) \to H$ Use Theorem 70.l to define a left inverse for h.]

3. (a) Show that if $G _ { 1 }$ and $G _ { 2 }$ have finite presentations,so does $G _ { 1 } * G _ { 2 }$

(b） Show that if $\pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } )$ is finitely generated and $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } )$ and $\pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } )$ have finite presentations,then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , x _ { 0 } )$ has a finite presentation. [Hint:If $N ^ { \prime }$ is a normal subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , x _ { 0 } ) * \pi _ { 1 } ( V , x _ { 0 } )$ that contains the elements $i _ { 1 } ( g _ { i } ) ^ { - 1 } i _ { 2 } ( g _ { i } )$ where ${ \pmb g } _ { i }$ runs over a set of generators for $\pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , x _ { 0 } )$ ,then $N ^ { \prime }$ contains $i _ { 1 } ( g ) ^ { - 1 } i _ { 2 } ( g )$ for arbitrary g.]

## \$71 The Fundamental Group of a Wedge of Circles

In this section, we define what we mean by a wedge of circles,and we compute its fundamental group.

Definition. Let X be a Hausdorff space that is the union of the subspaces $s _ { 1 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$ each of which is homeomorphic to the unit circle $s ^ { 1 }$ . Assume that there is a point p of X such that $S _ { i } \cap S _ { j } = \{ p \}$ whenever $i \neq j$ . Then X is called the wedge of the circles $s _ { 1 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$

Note that each space $\pmb { S _ { i } }$ ,being compact,is closed in X.Note also that X can be imbedded in the plane; if $C _ { i }$ denotes the circle of radius i in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ with center at (i, 0), then X is homeomorphic to $C _ { 1 } \cup \dots \cup C _ { n }$

Theorem 71.1.Let X be the wedge of the circles $s _ { 1 } , . . . , s _ { n }$ ; let $\pmb { p }$ be the common point of these circles．Then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , p )$ is a free group. If $f _ { i }$ is a loop in $\pmb { S _ { i } }$ that represents a generator of $\pi _ { 1 } ( S _ { i } , p )$ ，then the loops $f _ { 1 } , \ldots , f _ { n }$ represent a system of free generators for ${ \pmb \pi } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb p } )$

Proof.The result is immediate if $\pmb { n = 1 }$ . We proceed by induction on n. The proof is similar to the one given in Example l of the preceding section.

Let X be the wedge of the circles $s _ { 1 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$ ,with p the common point of these circles. Choose a point $\pmb { q } _ { i }$ of $\pmb { S _ { i } }$ different from p,for each i. Set $W _ { i } = S _ { i } - q _ { i }$ ,and let

$$
U = S _ { 1 } \cup W _ { 2 } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup W _ { n } \mathrm { a n d } V = W _ { 1 } \cup S _ { 2 } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup S _ { n } .
$$

Then $U \cap V = W _ { 1 } \cup \cdot \cdot \cdot \cup W _ { n }$ . See Figure 71.1. Each of the spaces U,V,and $U \cap V$ is path connected, being the union of path-connected spaces having a point in common.

<!-- image-->  
The space ${ \pmb W } _ { i }$ is homeomorphic to an open interval, so it has the point p as a deformation retract; let $F _ { i } : W _ { i } \times I  W _ { i }$ be the deformation retraction. The maps $F _ { i }$ fit together to define a map $F : ( U \cap V ) \times I \to U \cap V$ that is a deformation retraction of $U \cap V$ onto $\pmb { p } .$ (To show that F is continuous,we note that because $\pmb { S _ { i } }$ is a closed subspace of $\pmb { \chi }$ the space $W _ { i } = S _ { i } - q _ { i }$ is a closed subspace of $U \cap V$ ,so that $W _ { i } \times I$

is a closed subspace of $( U \cap V ) \times I$ Then the pasting lemma applies.） It follows that $U \cap V$ is simply connected,so that ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb p } )$ is the free product of the groups $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , p )$ and $\pi _ { 1 } ( V , p )$ ,relative to the monomorphisms induced by inclusion.

A similar argument shows that $s _ { 1 }$ is a deformation retract of U and $S _ { 2 } \cup \ldots \cup S _ { n }$ is a deformation retract of V.It follows that ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( U , p )$ is infinite cyclic,and the loop $f _ { 1 }$ represents a generator. It also follows, using the induction hypothesis,that $\pi _ { \downarrow } ( V , p )$ is a free group,with the loops $f _ { 2 } , \ldots , f _ { n }$ representing a system of free generators. Our theorem now follows from Theorem 69.2. □

We generalize this result to a space X that is the union of infinitely many circles having a point in common. Here we must be careful about the topology of X.

Definition.Let X be a space that is the union of the subspaces $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ ,for $\textbf { \em a } \in \mathbf { \mathcal { I } }$ The topology of X is said to be coherent with the subspaces $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ provided a subset C of X is closed in X if $\textstyle C \cap { X _ { \mathfrak { a } } }$ is closed in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ for each α. An equivalent condition is that a set be open in X if its intersection with each $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is open in $\pmb { \chi } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$

If X is the union of finitely many closed subspaces $X _ { 1 } , \ldots , X _ { n }$ ,then the topology of X is automatically coherent with these subspaces,since if $C \cap { X } _ { i }$ is closed in $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ ,it is closed in X,and C is the finite union of the sets $C \cap X _ { i }$

Definition.Let X be a space that is the union of the subspaces $s _ { \alpha }$ ,for $\alpha \in J$ ,each of which is homeomorphic to the unit circle. Assume there is a point p of X such that $S _ { \alpha } \cap S _ { \beta } = \{ p \}$ whenever $\alpha \neq \beta$ .If the topology of X is coherent with the subspaces $s _ { \alpha }$ ,then X is called the wedge of the circles $s _ { \alpha }$

In the finite case,the definition involved the Hausdorff condition instead of the coherence condition; in that case the coherence condition followed. In the infinite case,this would no longer be true,so we included the coherence condition as part of the definition. We would include the Hausdorffcondition as well, but that is no longer necessary, for it follows from the coherence condition:

Lemma 71.2. Let X be the wedge of the circles $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ ,for $\pmb { \alpha } \in \mathcal { I }$ Then X is normal. Furthermore,any compact subspace of X is contained in the union of finitely many circles $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$

Proof.It is clear that one-point sets are closed in X.Let A and B be disjoint closed subsets of $\pmb { \chi } \mathrm { . }$ assume that B does not contain p Choose disjoint subsets $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ and $\pmb { V _ { \alpha } }$ of $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ that are open in $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ and contain $\{ p \} \cup ( A \cap S _ { \alpha } )$ and $B \cap \mathcal { S } _ { \alpha }$ ,respectively.Let $U = \bigcup U _ { \alpha }$ and $V = \bigcup V _ { \alpha }$ ; then U and V are disjoint. Now $U \cap S _ { \alpha } = U _ { \alpha }$ because all the sets $U _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ contain $\pmb { p }$ and $v \cap S _ { \alpha } = V _ { \alpha }$ because no set $\pmb { V _ { \alpha } }$ contains $p$ Hence $U$ and V are open in X,as desired.Thus X is normal.

Now let C be a compact subspace of X. For each α for which it is possible,choose a point $x _ { \alpha }$ of $C \cap ( S _ { \alpha } - p )$ The set $D = \{ x _ { \alpha } \}$ is closed in X,because its intersection with each space $s _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ is a one-point set or is empty. For the same reason,each subset of D is closed in X.Thus D is a closed discrete subspace of X contained in $c$ since C is limit point compact, D must be finite.

Theorem 71.3. Let X be the wedge of the circles $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ ,for α $\in \mathcal { I }$ ; let p be the common point of these circles.Then ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb p } )$ is a free group. If $f _ { \alpha }$ is a loop in $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ representing a generator of $\dot { \pi } _ { 1 } ( S _ { \alpha } , p )$ , then the loops $\{ f _ { \alpha } \}$ represent a system of free generators for $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , p )$

Proof.Let $i _ { \pmb { \alpha } } : \pi _ { 1 } ( S _ { \pmb { \alpha } } , p )  \pi _ { 1 } ( \pmb { X } , p )$ be the homomorphism induced by inclusion; let $G _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ be the image of $i _ { \alpha }$

Note that if f is any loop in X based at p,then the image set of f is compact, so that f lies in some finite union of subspaces $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ . Furthermore,if f and g are two loops that are path homotopic in $\pmb { X } ,$ ，then they are actually path homotopic in some finite union of the subspaces $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$

It follows that the groups $\{ G _ { \pmb { \alpha } } \}$ generate ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb p } )$ .For if f is a loop in X,then f lies in $S _ { \pmb { \alpha } _ { 1 } } \cup \dots \cup S _ { \pmb { \alpha } _ { n } }$ for some finite set of indices; then Theorem 71.1 implies that $[ f ]$ is a product of elements of the groups $G _ { \alpha _ { 1 } } , \ldots , G _ { \alpha _ { n } }$ ．Similarly,it follows that $i _ { \beta }$ is a monomorphism.For if f is a loop in $s _ { \beta }$ that is path homotopic in X to a constant,then f is path homotopic to a constant in some finite union of spaces $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ ,s0 that Theorem 71.1 implies that $f$ is path homotopic to a constant in $S _ { \beta }$

Finally,suppose there is a reduced nonempty word

$$
\pmb { w } = ( g _ { \pmb { \alpha } _ { 1 } } . \dots . . , g _ { \pmb { \alpha } _ { n } } )
$$

in the elements of the groups $G _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$ that represents the identity element of $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , p )$ . Let f be a loop in X whose path-homotopy class is represented by w.Then f is path homotopic to a constant in X,so it is path homotopic to a constant in some finite union of subspaces $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ . This contradicts Theorem 71.1.

The preceding theorem depended on the fact that the topology of X was coherent with the subspaces $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ .Consider the following example:

EXAMPLE1Let $C _ { n }$ be the circle of radius $1 / n$ in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ with center at the point $( 1 / n , 0 )$ Let X be the subspace of $\textstyle \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ that is the union of these circles;then X is the union of a countably infinite collection of circles,each pair of which intersect in the origin $p$ However, X is not the wedge of the circles $C _ { n }$ ,wecall X (for convenience)the infinite earring.

One can verify directly that X does not have the topology coherent with the subspaces $c _ { n }$ ：the intersection of the positive r-axis with X contains exactly one point from each circle $C _ { n }$ ,but it is not closed in X.Alternatively,for each n,let $f _ { n }$ be a loop in $C _ { n }$ that representsa generatorof $\pi _ { 1 } ( C _ { n } , p )$ ,we show that ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb p } )$ is not a free group with $\{ [ f _ { n } ] \}$ as a system of free generators Indeed,we show the elements $[ f _ { t } ]$ do not even generate the group $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , p )$ ·

Consider the loopg in X defined as follows:For each n,define g on the interval $[ 1 / ( n + 1 ) , 1 / n ]$ to be the positive linear map of this interval onto [O.l] followed by $f _ { n }$ This specifies g on (O,1]; define $g ( 0 ) = p$ 、Because X has the subspace topology derived from $\dot { \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 }$ ,it is easy to see that g is continuous. See Figure 71.2.We show that given n,the element [g] does not belong to the subgroup $\scriptstyle G _ { n }$ of ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb p } )$ generated by $[ f _ { 1 } ] , \ldots , [ f _ { n } ]$

Choose $N > n$ ,and consider the map $h : X \to C _ { N }$ defined by setting $h ( x ) = x$ for $\pmb { x } \in C _ { N }$ and ${ \pmb h } ( { \pmb x } ) = { \pmb p }$ otherwise Then h is continuous,and the induced homomorphism $h _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( X , p ) \to \pi _ { l } ( C _ { N } , p )$ carries each element of $G _ { n }$ to the identity element.On the other hand,h og is the loop in ${ { C } _ { N } }$ that is constant outside $[ 1 / ( N + 1 ) , 1 / N ]$ and on this interval equals the positive linear map of this interval onto [O.I] followed by $\scriptstyle f _ { N }$ Therefore, $h _ { * } ( [ g ] ) = [ f _ { N } ]$ ,which generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( C _ { N } , p ) \colon$ Thus $[ g ] \notin G _ { n }$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 71.2

In the preceding theorem, we calculated the fundamental group of a space that is an infinite wedge of circles. For later use,we now show that such spaces do exist! (We shall use this result in Chapter l4.)

\*Lemma 71.4. Given an index set J, there exists a space X that is a wedge of circles $s _ { \alpha }$ for $\pmb { \alpha } \in \pmb { J }$

Proof.Give the set J the discrete topology,and let E be the product space $S ^ { 1 } \times J$ Choose a point $b _ { \mathbf { 0 } } \in S ^ { 1 }$ ,and let X be the quotient space obtained from E by collapsing the closed set $\pmb { P } = b _ { 0 } \times \pmb { J }$ to a point p. Let π : $E  X$ be the quotient map; let $S _ { \pmb { \alpha } } = \pi ( S ^ { 1 } \times \pmb { \alpha } )$ . We show that each $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ is homeomorphic to $s ^ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { \chi }$ is the wedge of the circles ${ \pmb S } _ { \pmb { \alpha } }$

Note that if C is closed in $s ^ { 1 } \times \pmb { \alpha }$ ,then $\pi ( C )$ is closed in X.For $\pi ^ { - 1 } \pi \left( C \right) = C$ if the point $b _ { 0 } \times \pmb { \alpha }$ is not in C,and $\pi ^ { - 1 } \pi ( C ) = C \cup P$ otherwise. In either case, $\pi ^ { - 1 } \pi ( C )$ is closed in $S ^ { 1 } \times J$ , so that $\pi ( C )$ is closed in X.

It follows that $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ is itself closed in X,since $S ^ { 1 } \times \pmb { \alpha }$ is closed in $S ^ { 1 } \times J$ ,and that π maps $S ^ { 1 } \times \pmb { \alpha }$ homeomorphically onto $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ .Let $\pmb { \pi _ { \alpha } }$ be this homeomorphism.

To show that X has the topology coherent with the subspaces $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ ,let $D \subset X$ and suppose that $D \cap { \mathcal { S } } _ { \alpha }$ is closed in $\pmb { S _ { \alpha } }$ for each α.Now

$$
\pi ^ { - 1 } ( D ) \cap ( S ^ { 1 } \times \alpha ) = \pi _ { \alpha } ^ { - 1 } ( D \cap S _ { \alpha } ) ;
$$

the latter set is closed in $s ^ { 1 } \times \pmb { \alpha }$ because $\pmb { \pi _ { \alpha } }$ is continuous.Then $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( D )$ is closed in $S ^ { 1 } \times J$ ,so that D is closed in X by definitionof the quotient topology.

## Exercises

1.Let X be a space that is the union of subspaces $s _ { 1 } , \ldots , s _ { n }$ ,each of which is homeomorphic to the unit circle. Assume there is a point p of X such that $S _ { i } \cap S _ { j } = \{ p \}$ for $i \neq j$

(a) Show that X is Hausdorfif and only if each space $\textstyle S _ { i }$ is closed in X.

(b）Show that X is Hausdorff if and only if the topology of X is coherent with the subspaces $\pmb { S _ { i } }$

(c） Give an example to show that X need not be Hausdorff.[Hint: See Exercises 5 of \$36.]

2.Suppose X is a space that is the union of the closed subspaces $X _ { 1 } , \ldots , X _ { n }$ assume there is a point p of X such that $X _ { i } \cap X _ { j } = \{ p \}$ for $i \neq j$ . Then we call X the wedge of the spaces $X _ { 1 } , \ldots , X _ { n }$ ,and write $X = X _ { 1 } \lor \cdots \lor X _ { n }$ . Show that if for each i, the point p is a deformation retract of an open set ${ \pmb W } _ { i }$ of $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ then $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , { \pmb \mathsf { p } } )$ is the external free product of the groups $\pi _ { 1 } ( X _ { i } , p )$ relative to the monomorphisms induced by inclusion.

3.What can you say about the fundamental group of X v Y if X is homeomorphic to $s ^ { 1 }$ and Y is homeomorphic to $s ^ { 2 } ?$

4. Show that if X is an infinite wedge of circles,then X does not satisfy the first countability axiom.

5. Let $s _ { n }$ be the circle of radius n in ${ \mathbb R } ^ { 2 }$ whose center is at the point $( n , 0 )$ . Let Y be the subspace of ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 2 }$ that is the union of these circles; let $\pmb { p }$ be their common point.

(a) Show that Y is not homeomorphic to a countably infinite wedge X of circles, nor to the space of Example 1.

(b） Show, however,that $\pi _ { 1 } ( Y , p )$ is a free group with $\{ [ f _ { n } ] \}$ as a system of free generators, where $f _ { n }$ is a loop representing a generator of $\pi _ { 1 } ( S _ { n } , p )$

## \$72 Adjoining a Two-cell

We have computed the fundamental group of the torus $T = S ^ { 1 } \times S ^ { 1 }$ in two ways. One involved considering the standard covering map $\begin{array} { r } { p \times p : \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \to S ^ { 1 } \times S ^ { 1 } } \end{array}$ and using the lifting correspondence. Another involved a basic theorem about the fundamental group of a product space. Now we compute the fundamental group of the torus in yet another way.

If one restricts the covering map $\pmb { P } \times \pmb { P }$ to the unit square, one obtains a quotient map $\pi : I ^ { 2 } \to T$ . It maps Bd $\hat { I ^ { 2 } }$ onto the subspace $A = ( S ^ { 1 } \times b _ { 0 } ) \cup ( b _ { 0 } \times S ^ { 1 } )$ ,which is the wedge of two circles,and it maps the rest of $I ^ { 2 }$ bijectively onto $T - A ,$ Thus, $\pmb { T }$ can be thought of as the space obtained by pasting the edges of the square $I ^ { 2 }$ onto the space A.

The process of constructung a space by pasting the edges of a polygonal region in the plane onto another space is quite useful. We show here how to co mpute the fundamental group of such a space. The applications will be many and fruitful.

Theorem 72.1.Let X be a Hausdorff space; let A be a closed path-connected sub-Space of X. Suppose that there is a continuous map $h : B ^ { 2 } \to { \overline { { X } } }$ that maps Int $B ^ { 2 }$ bijectivelyonto $\pmb { X } - \pmb { A }$ and maps $S ^ { 1 } = \Bag { \cal B } ^ { 2 }$ into A. Let $p \in { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 1 }$ and let $\pmb { a } = \pmb { h } ( \pmb { p } )$ ; let $k : ( S ^ { 1 } , p ) \to ( A , a )$ be the map obtained by restricting h. Then the homornorphism

$$
i _ { * } : \pi _ { 1 } ( A , a ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )
$$

induced by inclusion is surjective,and its kermel is the least normal subgroup of $\pi _ { 1 } ( A , a )$ containing the image of k.: $\pi _ { 1 } ( S ^ { 1 } , p ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( A , a )$

We sometimes say that the fundamental group of X is obtained from the fundamental group of A by“killing $\textstyle \operatorname { o f f } ^ { , }$ the class $k _ { * } [ f ]$ ，where【f] generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( \boldsymbol { S } ^ { 1 } , \boldsymbol { p } )$

Proof.Step 1. The origin O is the center point of $B ^ { 2 }$ let $\pmb { x _ { 0 } }$ be the point ${ \pmb h } ( { \pmb \mathbb { 0 } } )$ of X. If U is the open set $U = { \pmb X } - { \pmb x } _ { 0 }$ of X,we show that A is a deformation retract of U. See Figure 72.1.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 72.1

Let $C = h ( B ^ { 2 } )$ ,and let $\pi : B ^ { 2 } \to C$ be the map obtained by restricting the range of h. Consider the map

$$
\pi \times \mathrm { i d } : B ^ { 2 } \times I \longrightarrow C \times I ;
$$

it is a closed map because $B ^ { 2 } \times I$ is compact and $c \times I$ is Hausdorff; therefore, it is a quotient map. Its restriction

$$
\pi ^ { \prime } : ( B ^ { 2 } - \bullet ) \times I \longrightarrow ( C - x _ { 0 } ) \times I
$$

is also a quotient map,since its domain is open in $B ^ { 2 } \times I$ and is saturated with respect to $\pmb { \pi } \times \mathrm { i d } .$ There is a deformation retraction of $B ^ { 2 } - \theta$ onto $s ^ { 1 }$ ;it induces,via the

quotient map $\pmb { \pi } ^ { \prime } .$ ，a deformation retraction of $C \mathrm { ~ - ~ } x _ { 0 }$ onto $\pi ( \pmb { S } ^ { 1 } )$ .We extend this deformation retraction to all of $U \times I$ by letting it keep each point of A fixed during the deformation.Thus A is a deformation retract of $\boldsymbol { U }$

It follows that the inclusion of A into $\boldsymbol { \upsilon }$ induces an isomorphism of fundamental groups. Our theorem then reduces to proving the following statement:

Let f be a loop whose class generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 1 } , p )$ .Then the inclusion of U into X induces an epimorphism

$$
\pi _ { 1 } ( U , a ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )
$$

whose kernel is the least normal subgroup containing the classof the loop $g = h \circ f .$

Step 2. In order to prove thus result,it isconvenient to consider first the homomorphism $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , b ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( X , b )$ induced by inclusion relative to a base point b that does not belong to A.

Let b be any point of $U - A$ .Write X as the union of the open sets $\boldsymbol { U }$ and $V = X - A = \pi ( \operatorname { I n t } B ^ { 2 } )$ . Now $\boldsymbol { U }$ is path connected, since it has A as a deformation retract.Because π is aquotient map,its restriction to Int $B ^ { 2 }$ is also a quotient map and hence a homeomorphism; thus V is simply connected. The set $U \cap V = V - x _ { 0 }$ is homeomorphic to Int $B ^ { 2 } - \boldsymbol { \mathbf { 0 } } ,$ ，so it is path connected and its fundamental group is infinite cyclic. Since $\pmb { b }$ is a point of $U \cap V$ ,Corollary 70.4 implies that the homomorphism

$$
\pi _ { 1 } ( U , b ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , b )
$$

induced by inclusion is surjective,and its kernel is the least normal subgroup containing the image of the infinite cyclic group $\pi _ { 1 } ( U \cap V , b )$

Step 3. Now we change the base point back to a,proving the theorem.

Let q be the point of $B ^ { 2 }$ that is the mudpoint of the line segment from 0 to ${ p , }$ and let $b = h ( q )$ ; then $^ { b }$ is a point of $U \cap { \boldsymbol { V } }$ .Let $f _ { 0 }$ be a loop in Int $B ^ { 2 } - \Uparrow$ based at $\pmb q$ that represents a generator of the fundamental group of this space; then $g _ { 0 } = h \circ f _ { 0 }$ is a loop in $U \cap { \cal V }$ based at b that represents a generator of the fundamental group of $U \cap { \cal V }$ See Figure 72.2.

Step 2 tells us that the homomorphism $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , b ) \to \pi _ { 1 } ( X , b )$ induced by inclusion is surjective and its kernel is the least normal subgroup containing the class of the loop $g _ { 0 } = h \circ f _ { 0 }$ To obtain the analogous result with base point a we proceed as follows:

Let $\gamma$ be the straight-line path in $B ^ { 2 }$ from q to $p ;$ let δ be the path $\pmb { \delta } = \pmb { h } \circ \gamma$ in U from b to a.The isomorphisms induced by the path δ (both of which we denote by $\hat { \delta } )$ commute with the homomorphisms induced by inclusion in the following diagram:

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \pi _ { 1 } ( U , b ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , b ) } & { { } } \\ { \biggr \downarrow \hat { \delta } } & { { } \qquad \biggr \downarrow \hat { \delta } } \\ { \pi _ { 1 } ( U , a ) \longrightarrow \pi _ { 1 } ( X , a ) } & { { } } \end{array}
$$

Therefore,the homomorphusm of $\pi _ { 1 } ( U , a )$ into $\pi _ { \mathrm { l } } ( \pmb { X } , \pmb { a } )$ induced by inclusion is sur-jective,and its kernel is the least normal subgroup containing the element $\hat { \delta } ( [ g _ { 0 } ] )$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 72.2

The loop $f _ { 0 }$ represents a generator of the fundamental group of Int $B ^ { 2 } - \theta$ based at $\pmb q$ Then the loop $\bar { \gamma } * ( f _ { 0 } * \gamma )$ represents a generator of the fundamental group of $\pmb { B } ^ { 2 } - \pmb { 0 }$ based at ${ \pmb p } .$ Therefore,it is path homotopic either to $f$ or its_reverse ; suppose the former. Following this path homotopy by the map $\pmb { h }$ , we see that $\overline { { \delta } } \ast \left( g _ { 0 } \ast \delta \right)$ is path homotopic in $\boldsymbol { U }$ to $\pmb { g }$ Then $\hat { \delta } ( [ g _ { 0 } ] ) = [ \check { g } ]$ ,and the theorem follows. ■

There is nothing special in this theorem about the unit ball $B ^ { 2 }$ . The same result holds if we replace ${ \bar { \pmb { B } } } ^ { 2 }$ by any space B homeomorphic to $B ^ { 2 }$ ,if we denote by Bd B the subspace corresponding to $s ^ { \mathrm { i } }$ under the homeomorphism. Such a space B is called a 2- cell.The space X of this theorem is thought of as having been obtained by “adjoining a $2 \mathrm { - c e l l " }$ to A.We shal treat this situation more formally later.

## Exercises

1. Let X be a Hausdorff space; let A be a closed path-connected subspace. Suppose that h : $B ^ { n }  X$ is a continuous map that maps $S ^ { n - 1 }$ into A and maps Int $B ^ { n }$ bijectively onto $\pmb { X } - \pmb { A }$ .Let a be a point of $h ( S ^ { n - 1 } )$ . If $\pmb { n } > 2$ what cari you say about the homomorphism of $\pi _ { 1 } ( A , a )$ into ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb X } , { \pmb a } )$ induced by inclusion?

2.Let X be the adjunction space formed from the disjoint union of the normal, path-connected space A and the unit ball $B ^ { 2 }$ by means of a continuous map $f : S ^ { 1 } \to A$ .(See Exercise 8 of β35.） Show that X satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 72.1.Where do you use the fact that A is normal?

3. Let G be a group; let x be an element of $G \mathrm { \Omega }$ ； let N be the least normal subgroup of G containing x. Show that if there is a normal, path-connected space whose fundamental group is isomorphic to $G$ ，then there is a normal, path-connected space whose fundamental group is isomorphic to $G / N$

## \$73The Fundamental Groups of the Torus and the Dunce Cap

We now apply the results of the preceding section to compute two fundamental groups, one of which we already know and the other of which we do not. The techniques involved will be important later.

Theorem 73.1. The fundamental group of the torus has a presentation consisting of two generators α,β and asingle relation $\alpha \beta \alpha ^ { - 1 } \beta ^ { - 1 }$

Proof. Let ${ \pmb X } = { \pmb S } ^ { 1 } \times { \pmb S } ^ { 1 }$ be the torus,and let $h : I ^ { 2 } \to X$ be obtained by restricting the standard covering map $p \times p : \mathbb { R } \times \mathbb { R } \to S ^ { 1 } \times S ^ { 1 }$ . Let $\pmb { p }$ be the point (0,0) of Bd $I ^ { 2 }$ let $\pmb { a } = \pmb { h } ( \pmb { p } )$ ,and let $A = h ( { \mathbf { B } } \mathbf { d } I ^ { 2 } )$ . Then the hypotheses of Theorem 72.1 are satisfied.

The space A is the wedge of two circles,so the fundamental group of A is free. Indeed, if we let ${ \pmb a } _ { \mathbf { 0 } }$ be the path $a _ { 0 } ( t ) = ( t , 0 )$ and $b _ { 0 }$ be the path $b _ { 0 } ( t ) = ( 0 , t )$ in Bd $I ^ { 2 }$ ,then the paths $\alpha = h \circ a _ { 0 }$ and $\beta = h \circ b _ { 0 }$ are loops in A such that [α] and $[ \beta ]$ form a system of free generators for ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb { A } } , { \pmb { a } } )$ . See Figure 73.1

<!-- image-->  
Figure 73.1

Now let ${ \pmb a } _ { 1 }$ and $\pmb { b } _ { \mathrm { l } }$ be the paths $a _ { 1 } ( t ) = ( t , 1 )$ and $b _ { 1 } ( t ) = ( 1 , t )$ in Bd $\pmb { I } ^ { 2 }$ Consider the loop f in Bd $I ^ { 2 }$ defined by the equation

$$
f = a _ { 0 } * ( b _ { 1 } * ( \bar { a } _ { 1 } * \bar { b } _ { 0 } ) ) .
$$

Then f represents a generator of $\pi _ { 1 } ( \ B \mathbf { B } \mathbf { d } I ^ { 2 } , p )$ ； and the loop $g = h \circ f$ equals the product $\alpha * ( \beta * ( { \bar { \alpha } } * { \bar { \beta } } ) )$ .Theorem 72.1 tells us that $\pi _ { 1 } ( X , a )$ is the quotient of the free group on the free generators [α] and [β] by the least normal subgroup containing the element $[ \alpha ] [ \beta ] [ \alpha ] ^ { - 1 } [ \beta ] ^ { - 1 }$ ·

Corollary 73.2. The fundamental group of the torus is a free abelian group of rank 2.

Proof.Let G be the free group on generators α, $\beta ;$ and letNbe the least normal subgroup containing the element $\alpha \beta \bar { \alpha } ^ { - 1 } \beta ^ { - 1 }$ . Because this element is a commutator, N is contained in the commutator subgroup [G,G] of G. On the other hand, $G / N$ is abelian; for it is generated by the cosets αN and $\beta N$ ，and these elements of $G / N$ commute. Therefore N contains the commutator subgroup of G.

It follows from Theorem 69.4 that $G / N$ is a free abelian group of rank 2.

Definition.Let n be a positive integer with $\textbf { \textit { n } } > \textbf { \textit { l } }$ Let $r : \mathcal { S } ^ { 1 } \to \mathcal { S } ^ { 1 }$ be rotation through the angle $2 \pi / n$ ,mapping the point (cosθ,sinθ） to the point $\cos ( \theta +$ $2 \pi / n )$ ,sin $( \theta + 2 \pi / n ) )$ .Form a quotient space X from the unit ball $B ^ { 2 }$ by identifying each point x of $s ^ { 1 }$ with the points $r ( x ) , r ^ { 2 } ( x ) , \ldots , r ^ { n - 1 } ( x )$ .We shall show that X is a compact Hausdorff space; we call it the n-fold dunce cap.

Let $\pi : B ^ { 2 } \to X$ be the quotient map; we show that π is a closed map. In order to do this,we must show that if C is a closed set of $B ^ { 2 }$ ,then $\pi ^ { - 1 } \pi ( C )$ is also closed in $B ^ { 2 }$ ；it then will follow from the definition of the quotient topology that $\pi ( C )$ is closed in X. Let $C _ { 0 } = C \cap { \mathcal { S } } ^ { 1 }$ ; it is closed in $B ^ { 2 }$ .The set ${ \pmb { \pi } } ^ { - 1 } { \pmb { \pi } } ( C )$ equals the union of C and the sets $r ( C _ { 0 } ) , r ^ { 2 } ( C _ { 0 } ) , \dots , r ^ { n - 1 } ( C _ { 0 } )$ ,all of which are closed in $B ^ { 2 }$ because risa homeomorphism.Hence $\pi ^ { - 1 } \pi ( C )$ is closed in $B ^ { 2 }$ ,as desired.

Because π is continuous,X is compact. The fact that X is Hausdorff is a consequence of the following lemma,which was given as an exercise in \$31.

Lemma 73.3. Let $\pi : E \to X$ be a closed quotient map. If E is normal,then so is X.

ProofAssume E is normal. One-point sets are closed in X because one-point sets are closed in E.Now let A and B be disjoint closed sets of X．Then $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ and $\pmb { \pi } ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { B } )$ are disjoint closed sets of E.Choose disjoint open sets U and V of E containing $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ and $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( B )$ ,respectively. It is tempting to assume that $\pmb { \pi } ( U )$ and $\pi ( V )$ are the open sets about A and B that we are seeking. But they are not. For they need not be open (π is not necessarily an open map),and they need not be disjoint! See Figure 73.2.

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
Figure 73.2

So we proceed as follows: Let $C = E - U$ and let $D = E - V$ .Because C and D are closed sets of E,the sets $\pi ( C )$ and $\pi ( D )$ are closed in X.Because C contains no point of $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( A )$ , the set $\pi ( C )$ is disjoint from A.Then $U _ { 0 } = X - \pi ( C )$ is an open set of X containing A. Similarly, $V _ { 0 } = X - \pi ( D )$ is an open set of X containing B. Furthermore, $U _ { 0 }$ and $\scriptstyle v _ { 0 }$ are disjoint. For if $\pmb { x } \in U _ { 0 }$ , then $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( x )$ is disjoint from $c$ so that it is contained in U.Similarly,if $\pmb { x } \in V _ { 0 }$ ,then $\pmb { \pi } ^ { - 1 } ( \pmb { x } )$ is contained in V. Since U and V are disjoint,so are $U _ { 0 }$ and $\scriptstyle v _ { 0 }$ □

Let us note that the 2-fold dunce cap is a space we have seen before; it is homeomorphic to the projective plane $P ^ { 2 }$ To verify this fact,recall that $P ^ { 2 }$ was defined to be the quotient space obtained from $s ^ { 2 }$ by identifying x with -x for each x.Let $p : \mathcal { S } ^ { 2 }  \mathbf { \bar { \ } } P ^ { 2 }$ be the quotient map.Let us take the standard homeomorphism i of $B ^ { 2 }$ with the upper hemisphere of $s ^ { 2 }$ ,given by the equation

$$
i ( x , y ) = ( x , y , ( 1 - x ^ { 2 } - y ^ { 2 } ) ^ { 1 / 2 } ) ,
$$

and follow it by the map p.We obtain a map $\pi : B ^ { 2 } \to P ^ { 2 }$ that is continuous,closed, and surjective.On Int B it is injective,and for each $\pmb { x } \in \mathbb { S } ^ { 1 }$ ,it maps x and -x to the same point. Hence it induces a homeomorphism of the 2-fold dunce cap with $P ^ { 2 }$

The fundamental group of the n-fold dunce cap is just what you might expect from our computation for ${ \bar { P } } ^ { 2 }$

Theorem 73.4. The fundamental group of the n-fold dunce cap is a cyclic group of order n.

Proof. Let h : $B ^ { 2 }  X$ be the quotient map,where X is the n-fold dunce cap. Set $A = h ( \mathcal { S } ^ { 1 } )$ . Let $p = ( 1 , 0 ) \in S ^ { 1 }$ and let $a \ = \ h ( p )$ . Then h maps the arc C of $s ^ { 1 }$ running from p to $r ( p )$ onto $\pmb { A } ;$ it identifies the end points of C but is otherwise injective.Therefore,A is homeomorphic to acircle,so its fundamental group is infinite cyclic.Indeed,if y is the path

$$
\gamma ( t ) = ( \cos ( 2 \pi t / n ) , \sin ( 2 \pi t / n ) )
$$

in $s ^ { 1 }$ from p to $r ( p )$ , then $\alpha = h \circ \gamma$ represents a generator of ${ \pmb { \pi } } _ { 1 } ( { \pmb { A } } , { \pmb { a } } )$ . See Figure 73.3.

Now the class of the loop

$$
f = \gamma * ( ( r \circ \gamma ) * ( ( r ^ { 2 } \circ \gamma ) * \cdot \cdot \cdot * ( r ^ { n - 1 } \circ \gamma ) ) )
$$

<!-- image-->  
Figure 73.3

generates $\pi _ { 1 } ( \boldsymbol { S } ^ { 1 } , \boldsymbol { p } )$ . Since $h ( r ^ { m } ( x ) ) = h ( x )$ for all x and m,the loop h o f equals the n-fold product $\alpha * ( \alpha * ( \cdot \ \cdot * \alpha ) )$ .The theorem follows.

## Exercises

1. Find spaces whose fundamental groups are isomorphic to the following groups. (Here $\mathbb { Z } / n$ denotes the additive group of integers modulo n.)

(a) $\mathbb { Z } / n \times \mathbb { Z } / m .$

(b) $\mathbb { Z } / n _ { 1 } \times \mathbb { Z } / n _ { 2 } \times \cdot \cdot \cdot \times \mathbb { Z } / n _ { k }$

(c)Z/n \*Z/m.(See Exercise 2 of \$71.)

(d) $\mathbb { Z } / n _ { 1 } * \mathbb { Z } / n _ { 2 } * \cdot \cdot \cdot * \mathbb { Z } / n _ { k } .$

2. Prove the following:

Theorem.If G is a finitely presented group,then there is a compact Hausdorff space X whose fundamental group is isomorphic to G.

Proof. Suppose G has a presentation consisting of n generators and m relation. Let A be the wedge of n circles; form an adjunction space X from the union of A and m copies $\pmb { { \cal B } } _ { 1 } , \dots , \pmb { { \cal B } } _ { m }$ of the unit ballby means of a continuous map $f : \bigcup \ B \mathrm { d } \ B _ { \iota }  A$

(a)Show that X is Hausdorff.

(b) Prove the theorem in the case m = 1.

(c）Proceed by induction on m,using the algebraic result stated in the following exercise.

The construction outlined in this exercise is a standard one in algebraic topology; the space X is called a two-dimensional CW complex.

3.Lemma.Let $f : G \to H$ and $g : H \to K$ be homomorphisms;assume f is surjective. $H x _ { 0 } \in G$ ,and if ker g is the least normal subgroup of H containing $f ( x _ { 0 } )$ ，then ker $( g \circ f )$ is the least normal subgroup N of G containing ker f and xo.

Proof. Show that f(N) is normal; conclude that ker $( g \circ f ) = f ^ { - 1 } ( { \bf k e r } g ) \subset$ $f ^ { - 1 } f ( N ) = N$

4.Show that the space constructed in Exercise 2 is in fact metrizable.[Hint: The quotient map is a perfect map.]