If M is an integer such that $0 \leq M \leq N$ ,let $\mathcal { C } _ { M }$ denote the set of all products

$$
C = A _ { 1 } \times A _ { 2 } \times \mathrm { ~  ~ \cdot ~ } \times A _ { N } ,
$$

where exactly M of the sets $\pmb { A } _ { i }$ belong to $\mathcal { J }$ ,and the remainder belong toK.If $M > 0$ then C is homeomorphic to the product $( 0 , 1 ) ^ { M }$ and will be called an M-cube.If $M = 0 .$ ,then C consists of a single point and will be called a O-cube

Let $\mathcal { C } = \mathcal { C } _ { 0 } \cup \mathcal { C } _ { 1 } \cup \mathbf { \mathcal { ~ . ~ } } \cup \mathcal { C } _ { N }$ . Note that each point x of $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ lies in precisely one element of C because each real number $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ lies in precisely one element of ${ \mathcal { J } } \cup { \mathcal { K } }$ We shall expand each element $c$ of C slightly to an open set $U ( C )$ of $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ of diameter at most $3 / 2$ 、in such a way that if C and D are two different M-cubes,then $U ( C )$ and $U ( D )$ are disjoint.

Let $\mathbf { x } = ( x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { N } )$ be a point of the M-cube C.We show that there is a number $\epsilon ( { \bf x } ) > 0$ such that the ∈(x)-neighborhood of x intersects no M-cube other than C.If C is a O-cube, we set $\epsilon ( \mathbf { x } ) = 1 / 2$ and we are finished. Otherwise, $M > 0 ,$ and exactly M of the numbers $\pmb { \chi } _ { i }$ are not integers. Choose $\epsilon \leq 1 / 2$ so that for each $x _ { i }$ that is not an integer, the interval $( x _ { i } - \epsilon , x _ { i } + \epsilon )$ contains no integer. If $\mathbf { y } = ( y _ { 1 } , \dots , y _ { N } )$ is a point lying in the E-neighborhood of x, then $y _ { i }$ is nonintegral whenever $\pmb { x } _ { i }$ is nonintegral. This means that y either belongs to the same M-cube as x does,or y belongs to some L-cube for $L > M$ .In either case,the E-neighborhood of x intersects no M-cube other than C.

Given an M-cube C,we define the neighborhood $U ( C )$ of C to be the union of the $\epsilon ( { \bf x } ) / 2$ -neighborhoods of xforall ${ \pmb x } \in C$ It is then immediate that if C and D are different M-cubes, $U ( C )$ and $U ( D )$ are disjoint.Furthermore,if z is a point of $U ( C )$ then $d ( { \bf z } , { \bf x } ) < \epsilon ( { \bf x } ) / 2 < 1 / 4$ for some point X of C.Since C has diameter 1,the set U(C) has diameter at most $_ { 3 / 2 }$

Step 2.Given M with $0 ~ \leq ~ M ~ \leq ~ N$ ，define $\mathbf { \mathcal { A } } _ { M }$ to be the collection of all sets $U ( C )$ ，where $C \in \mathcal { C } _ { M }$ .The elements of $\mathbf { \mathcal { A } } _ { M }$ are disjoint,and each has diameter at most $3 / 2$ The remainder of the proof is a copy of the proof given in Example 3 for $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$

Corollary 50.7．Every compact m-manifold has topological dimension at most m

Corollary 50.8. Every compact m-manifold can be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 m + 1 }$

Corollary 50.9.Let X be a compact metrizable space. Then X can be imbedded in some euclidean space $\mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ if and only if X has finite topological dimension.

As mentioned earlier, much of what we have proved holds without assumption of compactness. We ask you to prove the appropriate generalizations in the exercises that follow

One thing we do not ask you to prove is the fact that the topological dimension of an m-manifold is precisely m. And for good reason; the proof requires the tools of algebraic topology.

Nor do we ask you to prove that $N = 2 m + 1$ is the smallest value of N such that every compact metrizable space of topological dimension m can be imbedded in ${ \mathbb R } ^ { N }$ The reason is the same.Even in the case of a linear graph,where $m = 1$ ,the proof is nontrivial,as we remarked earlier.

For further results in dimension theory, the reader is referred to the classical book of Hurewicz and Wallman [H-W]. In particular, this book discusses another, entirely different,definition of topological dimension,due to Menger and Urysohn. It is an inductive definition. The empty set has dimension -l． And a space has dimension at most n if there is a basis for its topology such that for each basis element B,the boundary of B has dimension at most n-1 The dimension of a space is the smallest value of n for which this condition holds. This notion of dimension agrees with ours for compact metrizable spaces.

## Exercises

1. Show that any discrete space has dimension O

2. Show that any connected $T _ { \parallel }$ space having more than one point has dimension at least 1.

3.Show that the topologist's sine curve has dimension l.

4. Show that the points $\mathbf { 0 } , \epsilon _ { 1 } , \epsilon _ { 2 } , \epsilon _ { 3 }$ ，and（1,1,l）are in general position in ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$ Sketch the corresponding imbedding into ${ \mathbb R } ^ { 3 }$ of the complete graph on five vertices.

5.Examine the proof of the imbedding theorem in the case $m = 1$ and show that the map g of part (2) actually maps X onto a linear graph in ${ \mathbb R } ^ { 3 }$

6.Prove the following:

Theorem.Let X be a locally compact Hausdorff space with a countable basis, such that every compact subspace of X has topological dimension at most m. Then X is homeomorphic to a closed subspace $O F \mathbb { R } ^ { \bar { 2 } m + 1 }$ ·

Proof. If $f : X \to \mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ is a continuous map,we say $f ( x )  \infty$ as $x $ 8if given n,there is a compact subspace C of X such that $f ( x ) > n$ for $x \in X - C$

$$
\mathbf { L e t } ~ \bar { \pmb { \rho } }
$$

$$
{ \mathcal { C } } ( X , \mathbb { R } ^ { N } )
$$

$$
f ( x )  \infty
$$

$$
x 
$$

$$
\bar { \rho } ( f , g ) < 1
$$

$$
x  \infty
$$

(b） Show that if $f ( x )  \infty$ as x → oo,then f extends to a continuous map of one-point compactifications.Conclude that if f is injective as well,then f is a homeomorphism of X with a closed subspace of $\mathbf { \bar { R } } ^ { N }$

(c） Given $f : X \to \mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ and given a compact subspace C of X,let

$$
U _ { \epsilon } ( C ) = \{ f \mid \Delta ( f | C ) < \epsilon \} .
$$

Show that $U _ { \epsilon } ( C )$ is open in ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , \mathbb { R } ^ { N } )$

(d) Show that if $N = 2 m + 1$ ,then $U _ { \epsilon } ( C )$ is dense in ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , \mathbb { R } ^ { N } )$ . [Hinr: Given f and given $\epsilon , \delta > 0 $ choose $g : C \to \mathbb { R } ^ { N }$ so that $d ( f ( x ) , g ( x ) ) < \delta$ for ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb C }$ and $\Delta ( g ) < \epsilon$ Extend f -g to $\pmb { h } : \pmb { X }  [ - \delta , \delta ] ^ { N }$ using the Tietze theorem.]

(e） Show there exists a map $f : X \to \mathbb { R }$ such that $f ( x ) \to \infty { \mathrm { ~ a s ~ } } x \to \infty$ [Hint:Wnte X as the union of compact subspaces $C _ { n }$ such that $c _ { n } \subset$ Int $C _ { n + 1 }$ for each n.]

(f) Let $C _ { n }$ be as in (e).Use the fact that $\bigcap { U _ { 1 / n } ( C _ { n } ) }$ is dense in ${ \mathcal { C } } ( X , \mathbb { R } ^ { N } )$ to complete the proof.

7. Corollary. Every m-marufold can be imbedded in $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 m + 1 }$ as a closed subspace.

8.Recall that X is said to be g-compact if there is a countable collection of compact subspaces of X whose interiors cover X

Theorem.Let X be a g-compact Hausdorff space. If every compact subspace of X has topological dimension at most m,then so does X.

Proof.Let A be an open cover of X.Find an open cover B of X refining A that has order at most $m + 1$ ,as follows:

(a） Show that $\pmb { X } = \bigcup \pmb { X _ { n } }$ , where $X _ { n }$ is compact and $\textstyle X _ { n } \subset$ Int $X _ { n + 1 }$ for each n.Let $\pmb { \chi } _ { 0 } = \pmb { \chi }$

(b） Find an open covering ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { 0 }$ of X refining A such that for each n,each element of $\mathcal { B } _ { 0 }$ that intersects $\pmb { X _ { n } }$ lies in $X _ { n + 1 }$

(c） Suppose $n ~ \geq ~ 0$ and ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { n }$ is an open covering of X refining ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { 0 }$ such that ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { n }$ has order at most m + l at points of $\pmb { X _ { n } }$ .Choose an open covering $\pmb { \mathcal { C } }$ of X refining ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { \pmb { n } }$ that has order at most m + l at points of $X _ { n + 1 }$ . Choose $\textbf { \textit { f } } . \textbf { \textit { c } }  \textbf { \textit { B } } _ { n }$ so that $C \subset f ( C )$ .For $B \in \mathcal { B } _ { n }$ ,let $D ( B )$ be the union of those C for which $f ( C ) = B$ Let ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { n + 1 }$ consist of all sets $B \in \mathcal { B } _ { n }$ for which $B \cap X _ { n - 1 } \neq \emptyset$ ,along with all sets $D ( B )$ for which $B \in \mathcal { B } _ { n }$ and $B \cap X _ { n - 1 } = \emptyset$ Show that $\mathcal { B } _ { n + 1 }$ is an open covering of X that refines ${ \mathcal { B } } _ { \mathfrak { n } }$ and has order at most m +l at points of $X _ { n + 1 }$

(d)Define B as follows: Given a set B,it belongs to B if there is an N such that $\pmb { { \cal B } } \in \mathcal { B } _ { n }$ for all $n \geq N$

9. Corollary. Every m-manifold has topological dimension at most m.

10.Corollary． Every closed subspace of ${ \mathbb R } ^ { N }$ has topological dimension at most N.

11. Corollary.A space X can be imbedded as a closed subspace of ${ \mathbb R } ^ { N }$ for some N if and only if X is locally compact and Hausdorff with acountable basis,and has finite topological dimension.

## \*Supplementary Exercises: Locally Euclidean Spaces

A space X is said to be locally m-euclidean if for each ${ \pmb x } \in { \pmb X }$ ,there isaneighborhood of x that is homeomorphic to an open set of $\mathbb { R } ^ { m }$ . Such a space X automatically satisfies the $\pmb { T } _ { 1 }$ axiom, but it need not be Hausdorff.(See the exercises of \$36.) However, if X is Hausdorff and has a countable basis,then X is called an m-manifold.

Throughout these exercises,let X be a space that is locally m-euclidean.

1. Show that X is locally compact and locally metrizable.

2.Consider the following conditions on X:

(i）X is compact Hausdorff.

(ii) X is an m-manifold.

(ii) X is metrizable.

(iv） X is normal.

(v)X is Hausdorff.

Show that ${ \bf ( i ) } \Rightarrow { \bf ( i i ) } \Rightarrow { \bf ( i i i ) } \Rightarrow { \bf ( i v ) } \Rightarrow { \bf ( v ) } .$

3. Show that R is locally l-euclidean and satisfies (ii) but not (i).

4.Show that R × R in the dictionary order topology is locally l-euclidean and satisfies (ii) but not (ii).

5.Show that the long line is locally l-euclidean and satisfies (iv) but not (ii). (See the exercises of \$24.)

\*6.There is a space that is locally 2-euclidean and satisfies (v) but not (iv). It is constructed as follows.Let A be the following subspace of ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$

$$
A = \{ ( x , y , 0 ) \mid x > 0 \} .
$$

Given c real, let $B _ { c }$ be the following subspace of ${ \mathbb { R } } ^ { 3 }$

$$
B _ { c } = \{ ( x , y , c ) \mid x \leq 0 \} .
$$

Let X be the set that is the union of A and allte spaces $B _ { c }$ for c real. Topologize X by taking as a basis all sets of the following three types:

(i) U,where U is open in A.

(ii) V,where V is open in the subspace of $\pmb { B _ { c } }$ Consisting of points with $x < 0$

(iii） For each open interval $\pmb { I } = ( a , b )$ of R,each real number c,and each $\epsilon > 0 .$ the set $A _ { c } ( I , \epsilon ) \cup B _ { c } ( I , \epsilon )$ ,where

$$
A _ { c } ( I , \epsilon ) = \{ ( x , y , 0 ) \mid 0 < x < \epsilon \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } c + a x < y < c + b x \} ,
$$

$$
B _ { c } ( I , \epsilon ) = \{ ( x , y , c ) \mid - \epsilon < x \leq 0 \mathrm { a n d } a < y < b \} .
$$

The space X is called the “Prufer manifold."

(a) Sketch the sets $A _ { c } ( I , \epsilon )$ and $B _ { c } ( I , \epsilon )$

(b） Show the sets of types (i)-(ii)form a basis for a topology on X.

(c) Show the map $f _ { c } : \mathbb { R } ^ { 2 } \to X$ given by

$$
f _ { c } ( x , y ) = \left\{ { \begin{array} { l l } { ( x , c + x y , 0 ) } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x > 0 , } \\ { ( x , y , c ) } & { { \mathrm { f o r ~ } } x \leq 0 } \end{array} } \right.
$$

defines a homeomorphism of $\mathbb { R } ^ { 2 }$ with the subspace $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B _ { c } }$ of x.

(d） Show that $\pmb { A } \cup \pmb { B _ { c } }$ is open in X; conclude that X is 2-euclidean.

(e）Show that X is Hausdorff.

(f） Show that X is not normal.[Hint: The subspace

$$
L = \{ ( 0 , 0 , c ) \mid c \in \mathbb { R } \}
$$

of X is closed and discrete. Compare Example 3 of 31.]

7. Show that X is Hausdorfif and only if X is completely regular.

8.Show that X is metrizable if and only if X is paracompact Hausdorff.

9. Show that if X is metrzable,then each component of X is an m-manifold.